KEP-4381: DRA update for 1.31 (#4709)
kubernetes/enhancements: keps/sig-node/4381-dra-structured-parameters/README.md

dynamically as needed.

This KEP introduces a new API for describing which of these new resources
a pod needs. Typically, such resources are devices like a GPU or other kinds
of accelerators. The API supports:

- Network-attached devices. The existing [device plugin API](https://github.com/kubernetes/design-proposals-archive/blob/main/resource-management/device-plugin.md)
  is limited to hardware on a node. However, further work is still
  needed to actually use the new API with those.
- Sharing of allocated devices between multiple containers or pods.

>   The device manager API currently cannot share devices at all. It

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  The device plugin API currently cannot share devices at all. It
```

  The device manager API currently cannot share devices at all. It
  could be extended to share devices between containers in a single pod,
  but supporting sharing between pods would need a completely new
  API similar to the one in this KEP.
- Using a device that is expensive to initialize multiple times
  in different pods. This is not possible at the moment.
- Custom parameters that describe device configuration.
  With the current Pod API, annotations have to be used to capture such
  parameters and then hacks are needed to access them from a CSI driver or
  device plugin.

Support for new hardware will be provided by hardware vendor add-ons. Those add-ons
are called "DRA drivers". They are responsible for reporting available devices in a format defined and
understood by Kubernetes and for configuring hardware before it is used. Kubernetes
handles the allocation of those devices as part of pod scheduling.
This KEP does not replace other means of requesting traditional resources
(RAM/CPU, volumes, extended resources).

At a high-level, DRA with structured parameters takes the following form:

* DRA drivers publish their available devices in the form of a

>   `ResourceSlice` object on a node-by-node basis. This object is stored in the

Author: Changed.

dynamically as needed.

This KEP introduces a new API for describing which of these new resources
a pod needs. Typically, such resources are devices like a GPU or other kinds
of accelerators. The API supports:

- Network-attached devices. The existing [device plugin API](https://github.com/kubernetes/design-proposals-archive/blob/main/resource-management/device-plugin.md)
  is limited to hardware on a node. However, further work is still
  needed to actually use the new API with those.
- Sharing of allocated devices between multiple containers or pods.
  The device plugin API currently cannot share devices at all. It
  could be extended to share devices between containers in a single pod,
  but supporting sharing between pods would need a completely new
  API similar to the one in this KEP.

> - Using a device that is expensive to initialize multiple times

Author: You can point several different pods at the same claim and then the NodePrepareResources call is only done once, so it's still kind of true.

What no longer works is "immediate allocation with classic DRA" where expensive initialization could have been done once at allocation time. I think I'll rephrase in a follow-up as:

- Initialize a device once, then use it in different pods. This is not possible at the moment.

> - Using a device that is expensive to initialize multiple times

Author: "Not possible at the moment" *with the device plugin* API. It is possible with DRA. I'll drop the "This is not possibe..." part.

This whole section goes back all the way to when DRA started and we had to explain why extending the device plugin API wasn't an option and/or why DRA was better, so "at the moment" was two years ago. Very confusing *now*, of course - sorry!

- Support node-local resources

- Support configuration parameters that are specified in a format defined by a
  vendor.

### Non-Goals

* Replace the device plugin API. For devices that fit into its model
  of a single, linear quantity it is a good solution. Other devices
  should use dynamic resource allocation. Both are expected to co-exist, with vendors
  choosing the API that better suits their needs on a case-by-case
  basis. Because the new API is going to be implemented independently of the
  existing device plugin support, there's little risk of breaking stable APIs.

* Provide an abstraction layer for device requests, i.e., something like a
  “I want some kind of GPU”. Users will need to know about specific
  DRA drivers and which configuration parameters and attributes they support.
  Administrators and/or vendors can simplify this by creating device class
  objects in the cluster, but defining those is out-of-scope for Kubernetes.

>   Portability of  workloads could be added on top of this proposal by

Author: Fixed.

of that cluster. I prepare the nodes and deploy the vendor's components with
`kubectl create`.

I create a DeviceClass for the hardware with parameters that only I as the
administrator am allowed to choose, like for example running a command with
root privileges that does some cluster-specific initialization of a device
each time it is prepared on a node:
```
apiVersion: resource.k8s.io/v1alpha3
kind: DeviceClass
metadata:
  name: acme-gpu

requirements:
- deviceSelector: device.driverName == "gpu.acme.example.com"

> 

Reviewer: OK, that's fine then. Just a suggestion.

config:
- opaque:
    driverName: gpu.acme.example.com
    parameters:
      apiVersion: gpu.acme.example.com/v1
      kind: GPUInit
      # DANGER! This option must not be accepted for
      # user-supplied parameters.
      initCommand:
        - /usr/local/bin/acme-gpu-init
        - --cluster

>         - my-cluster

Reviewer: So the kubelet plugin is now responsible for pulling down a device class, parsing it and deciding if this command is allowed or not?

of that cluster. I prepare the nodes and deploy the vendor's components with
`kubectl create`.

> I create a DeviceClass for the hardware with parameters that only I as the

Author: This use case is the opposite: it *grants* users access to settings that they wouldn't be able to use otherwise.

What you have in mind is the use case "I as administrator want to ensure that all devices are configured in a certain way." Do we really have that use case?

Isn't it better solved when deploying the driver? The driver has to support configuration options for whatever the admin wants to control already for this to work, so this could also be part of the driver-specific deployment.

Does it have to be through the API? 

Both use cases may need further justifications. Perhaps we should remove config from class entirely in 1.31 and defer?

> I create a DeviceClass for the hardware with parameters that only I as the

Author: > >  Isn't it better solved when deploying the driver?
>
> Given my own context of a cloud provider, I doubt very much that cluster admins will be involved in the deployment of drivers. They will come with the VMs and be managed by the cluster provider.

Ack. However, we still don't know what that admin-controlled configuration would be, so perhaps it is too early to design an API for this.

> I am also still very concerned about quota-ish admin controls and I see class playing a big role in that.

Let's discuss quota in https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/wg-device-management/issues/24

administrator am allowed to choose, like for example running a command with
root privileges that does some cluster-specific initialization of a device
each time it is prepared on a node:

```yaml
apiVersion: resource.k8s.io/v1alpha3
kind: DeviceClass
metadata:
  name: acme-gpu

selectors:
- expression: device.driverName == "gpu.acme.example.com"

config:
- opaque:
    driverName: gpu.acme.example.com
    parameters:
      apiVersion: gpu.acme.example.com/v1
      kind: GPUInit
      # DANGER! This option must not be accepted for
      # user-supplied parameters.
      initCommand:
        - /usr/local/bin/acme-gpu-init
        - --cluster
        - my-cluster
```

#### Partial GPU allocation

As a user, I want to use a GPU as accelerator, but don't need exclusive access
to that GPU. Running my workload with just 2Gb of memory is sufficient. This is
supported by the ACME GPU hardware. I know that the administrator has created
an "acme-gpu" DeviceClass and that such devices have a
`gpu.acme.example.com/memory` attribute.

For a simple trial, I create a Pod directly where two containers share the same subset
of the GPU:

```yaml
apiVersion: resource.k8s.io/v1alpha2

> kind: ResourceClaimTemplate

Author: I'm taking a TODO for the next KEP update about this.

    # Additional annotations or labels for the
    # ResourceClaim could be specified here.
  spec:
    requests:
    - name: gpu-request # could be used to select this device in a container when requesting more than one
      deviceClassName: acme-gpu

>       deviceSelector: device.quantityAttribute["gpu.acme.example.com/memory"].isGreaterThan(quantity("2Gi"))

Reviewer: Has it been decided yet if we will "simplify" this syntax or not?

Author: Updated with `device.` prefix (see https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/wg-device-management/issues/23#issuecomment-2160044359).

    # Additional annotations or labels for the
    # ResourceClaim could be specified here.
  spec:

>     requests:

Author: I have two arguments:
- ResourceSlice and ResourceClaim are the "outer API" that is more abstract. We use it for devices now, but this could change. How to deal with devices is the "inner API", embedded in both.
- A PersistentVolumeClaim is asking for exactly one volume. A ResourceClaim doesn't. Calling it "DeviceClaim" would give the wrong impression that it's just for "one device".

For this specific field, @klueska [had already suggested](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/pull/4709#discussion_r1635314449) renaming to "devices". I was initially okay with it because it would have made sense ("inner API"), but when thinking about the implications on how to describe and reference the entries elsewhere we found that "device name" became ambiguous (entry in this slice vs. entry in ResourceSlice). "deviceRequests" might have worked, but for now we just kept "requests". See that thread for details.

>     requests:

Reviewer 2: That means if we add per-device allocatable resources, we end up with `claim.spec.requests[*].device.requests` which is an improvement on `claim.spec.requests[*].requests` which is what we would get today.

I still think it should just be `DeviceClaim` though, if I had my druthers. It would be reasonable in my mind to have `DeviceClaim`, and still keep `ResourceSlice`. Later, if we have Gizmos, maybe we have a `GizmoClaim`. By that time we will understand our needs enough I can imagine we may be OK with putting some cross-claim constraints into PodSpec, if - highly highly speculatively - we need some sort of constraints between devices and gizmos. And even if we don't want that, if we really really need it, we can even have a special `CompositeClaim` or something. But this all seems like speculation on top of speculation on top of speculation...

What we know about now are devices; `DeviceClaim` constrains us to thinking about devices.

>     requests:

Author: To me, a `ResourceClaim` is still the general concept, with corresponding support in the pod API and in the resource claim controller. I'm -2 on making all of that specific to devices. Only what each "claim.spec.request" is for could vary.

With that in mind, `claim.spec.requests[*].device` makes sense to me. I'm pretty sure I had a one-of there at some point and only removed it because of "we only do devices, drop this" review feedback :sweat_smile:

>     requests:

Reviewer 2: works for me

>     requests:

Reviewer 3: SGTM -

>       - "gpu"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      - name: "gpu"
```

Reviewer: Also above, but i can't comment there since it's not in the diff...

```

This request triggers allocation on a node that has a GPU device with
at least 2Gi of memory available and then the Pod runs on that node. The remaining
capacity of the GPU may be usable for other pods. The lifecycle of the allocation

> is tied to the lifecycle of the Pod.

Reviewer: Maybe I'm reading this wrong, but this is *not* how it will work with NVIDIA GPUs. You either get the whole GPU or you don't. Or do you mean that other pods could reference this _same_ claim in order to use the remaining memory (rather than instantiating a separate claim)?

Author: This is an abstract use case, not something that necessarily maps to an NVIDIA GPU.

I think it was originally written for classic DRA. We currently cannot do the "substract GPU RAM and use the rest" that is implied here.

I need to rewrite this based on static partitioning.

In production, a similar PodTemplateSpec in a Deployment will be used.

### Publishing node resources

The devices available on a node need to be published to the API server. In
the typical case, this is expected to be published by the on-node driver
as described in the next paragraph. However, the source of this data may vary; for
example, a cloud provider controller could populate this based upon information
from the cloud provider API.

In the kubelet case, each driver running on a node publishes a set of
`ResourceSlice` objects to the API server for its own resources, using its
connection to the apiserver. The collection of these objects form a pool from
which resources can be allocated. Some additional fields (defined in the API
section) enable a consumer to determine whether it has a complete and

> consistent view of that pool.

Reviewer: Given the description here, wouldn't `ResourcePoolSlice` be a more appropriate name? This is one slice of an overall `ResourcePool`.

Author: That is a renaming that makes sense to me.

Reviewer: @thockin @johnbelamaric what do you think?

Reviewer: Sounds good. I don't feel too strongly. I just keep getting hung up on seeing this as described here:
https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/pull/4384#discussion_r1482130696

Access control through a validating admission
policy can ensure that the drivers running on one node are not allowed to
create or modify `ResourceSlices` belonging to another node. The `nodeName`
and `driverName` fields in each `ResourceSlice` object are used to determine which objects are
managed by which driver instance. The owner reference ensures that objects

> beloging to a node get cleaned up when the node gets removed.

Reviewer: From what I understood below, `nodeName` is optional (i.e. in the case when `poolName` is specified). Or is that only meant to be used in the "non-kubelet case", and this text is focused only the "kubelet case". Maybe we need a different name for this.

Author: In the kubelet case, `nodeName` always has to be set.

Reviewer: Does this need to change in light of the discussion above:
https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/pull/4709#discussion_r1633473769

Author: We are keeping the `nodeName` field, so this remains valid.

In addition, whenever kubelet starts, it first deletes all `ResourceSlices`
belonging to the node with a `DeleteCollection` call that uses the node name in
a field filter. This ensures that no pods depending in DRA get scheduled to the
node until the required DRA drivers have started up again (node reboot) and
reconnected to kubelet (kubelet restart). It also ensures that drivers which
don't get started up again at all don't leave stale `ResourceSlices`
behind. Garbage collection does not help in this case because the node object
still exists. For the same reasons, the ResourceSlices belonging to a driver
get removed when the driver unregisters, this time with a field filter for node

> name and driver name.

Reviewer: As mentioned elsewhere, does this then imply that we will never be able to store a `status` on these objects?

Author: We can add a status. Once we do, we need to become more careful with deletion and add more rules around it.

Author: Right, it's on the cusp. Someone still needs to define what that status looks like and who populates it (https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/wg-device-management/issues/19).

I prefer to merge this without a status, just to be sure that we have something that is agreed upon for 1.31. Perhaps we can get an extension to add the status.

Author: I looked into this today (see issue comments), but it's not really obvious what the exact use cases are and how to model them in the API. Let's not try for 1.31.

Deleting `ResourceSlices` is possible because all information in them can be
reconstructed by the driver. This has no effect on already allocated claims
because the allocation result is tracked in those claims, not the
`ResourceSlice` objects (see [below](#state-and-communication)).

> Embedded inside each `ResourceSlice` is the representation of one or more device.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Embedded inside each `ResourceSlice` is the representation of one or more devices.
```

```yaml
kind: ResourceSlice
apiVersion: resource.k8s.io/v1alpha3
...
spec:
  nodeName: worker-1
  driverName: cards.dra.example.com
  devices:
  - name: card-1
    attributes:
    - name: manufacturer # a vendor-specific attribute, automatically qualified as cards.dra.example.com/manufacturer
      string: Cards-are-us Inc.
    - name: productName:
      string: ACME T1000 16GB
    - name: driverVersion
      version: 1.2.3
    - name: runtimeVersion
      string: 11.1.42
    - name: memory
      quantity: 16Gi
    - name: powerSavingSupported
      bool: true
    - name: dra.k8s.io/pciRoot # a fictional standardized attribute, not actually part of this KEP
      string: pci-root-0
```

Compared to labels, attributes have values of exactly one type. As
described later on, these attributes can be used in CEL expressions to select a
specific resource for allocation on a node.

To avoid any future conflicts, we reserve any attributes with the ".k8s.io" domain suffix

> for future use and standardization by Kubernetes. This could be used to describe

Reviewer: I haven't been following all the latest on this, but isn't it now a `k8s.io/` prefix?

Author: Yes. Will change.

topology across resources from different vendors, for example, but this is out-
of-scope for now.

**Note:** If a driver needs to remove a device or change its attributes,
then there is a risk that a claim gets allocated based on the old
`ResourceSlice`. The scheduler must handle
scenarios where more devices are allocated than available. The kubelet plugin
of a DRA driver ***must*** double-check that the allocated devices are still
available when NodePrepareResource is called. If not, the pod cannot start until
the device comes back. Treating this as a fatal error during pod admission

> would allow us to delete the pod and trying again with a new one.

Reviewer: At present we don't do anything for DRA during pod admission. Everything is done at container start. We wanted to do it at pod-admission, but there is no `retry` loop during pod-admission.  We need to be able to handle transient failures in calls to `NodePrepareResources` and `NodeUnprepareResources()`, so until there is a way to do this in the pod-admission loop, we are stuck doing things at container start.

Author: Do we want to document that here?

Reviewer: I only mention it because the text says:

>  Treating this as a fatal error during pod admission would allow us to delete the pod and trying again with a new one.

And my point is that we never look at it during pod admission (at least not currently).

Author: So that should say "Checking it at admission time and ... would allow us...".

### Using structured parameters

A ResourceClaim is a request to allocate one or more devices. Each request in a
claim may reference a pre-defined DeviceClass to narrow down which devices are
desired or describe that directly in the request itself through a device
selector. A device selector is a CEL expression that must evaluate to true if a
device satisfies the request. A special `device` variable provides access to

> the attributes of a device.

Reviewer: Is there just a single selector per request? At one point we had a design for impliciltly "anding" multiple deviceSelector strings. Is that now not part of the design?

Author: A request has multiple requirements, and each requirement is a CEL selector. So you can AND them together.

I need to change "a device selector" into "one or more device selectors".

Reviewer: This is related to:
https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/pull/4709/files#r1633087176

Author: I like that. Changed, with "expression" instead of "deviceSelector".

Author: The text still talks about "device selector" because that is what that expression is.

Reviewer: What other fields to we expect to live along side `expression`as a one-of in the future?

Author: Variable definitions for the CEL expressions was mentioned in one thread somewhere - found it: https://docs.google.com/document/d/1i0xVx884vsWzVaVb72LtEqjsVILmNkeZimAyz4Bj-m0/edit?disco=AAABLY07Bjc

To correlate different devices, a claim may have "match attributes". Those are
the names of attributes whose values must be the same for all devices that get

> allocated for the claim.

Reviewer: What if I only want to correlate attributes for a subset of the devices in the claim?

Specifically, I'm thinking of the following (real-world) use-case, where I want 2 MIG devices from the same parent GPU and each of them wants a VF from the NIC on the same PCIe root complex:
```
apiVersion: resource.k8s.io/v1alpha2
kind: ResourceClaim
metadata:
  name: mig-devices-and-nics
spec:
  requests:
  - name: mig-0
    deviceClassName: gpu.nvidia.com
    deviceSelectors: "device['type'] == 'MIG' && device['profile'] == '3g.20gb'"
    
  - name: mig-1
    deviceClassName: gpu.nvidia.com
    deviceSelectors: "device['type'] == 'MIG' && device['profile'] == '3g.20gb'"

  - name: nic-0
    deviceClassName: rdma.nvidia.com
    deviceSelectors:
    - "device['sriovType'] == 'vf'"
    
  - name: nic-1
    deviceClassName: rdma.nvidia.com
    deviceSelectors:
    - "device['sriovType'] == 'vf'"

  requirements:
  - match:
      attribute: parentUUID # For the MIG devices
  - match:
      attribute: k8s.io/pcieRoot # For all devices
```

Reviewer 2: We cannot do this. Ways to accomplish this:

1) Allow cross-claim match attributes, in addition to within-claim-across-requests. Then, you would create two claims, one for the MIGs aligned on parentUUID, and one for the NICs, and you would specify a match across the claims of the pcieRoot. This requires podspec changes to allow match attributes.
2) Treat missing attributes in the match list as empty, and fully-qualify (with driver name) the parentUUID attribute with the `gpu.nvidia.com`. Since empty == empty, those would always match, and so these attribute matches would apply across all requests.
3) Match attributes becomes a "match expression" so the CEL can include some logic to get the result you want
4) Some sort of claim nesting...

For simplicity, 2) seems like the right call to me.
To do it, we would need: 1) to allocate the, because it would require either  *cross-claim* match attributes. Which we have not done because it requires putting match attributes into the pod spec.

Reviewer 2: Hmm...what if the claim author could create "variables" which were CEL expressions that could then be used anywhere attributes can be used. That would solve it, too, while keeping the simplicity of the "match on list of attributes" API for most cases. Although maybe since an attribute name is basically a simple CEL expression, 3) is OK as it is.

Author: I think we want a "match expression" for more advanced cases. We talked about that before, we just haven't figured out what the CEL expression would look like. "Match attributes" are the simple solution that we can implement now. They have value also when we later add a "match expression" because they easier to use.

Author: > What if I only want to correlate attributes for a subset of the devices in the claim?

Your proposal from https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/pull/4709#discussion_r1632269856 could cover that.

Reviewer: Yeah, except taht I think `match.attribute` is now flattened to `matchAttribute`, so:
```yaml
apiVersion: resource.k8s.io/v1alpha2
kind: ResourceClaim
metadata:
  name: mig-devices-and-nics
spec:
  requests:
  - name: mig-0
    deviceClassName: gpu.nvidia.com
    deviceSelectors: "device['type'] == 'MIG' && device['profile'] == '3g.20gb'"
    
  - name: mig-1
    deviceClassName: gpu.nvidia.com
    deviceSelectors: "device['type'] == 'MIG' && device['profile'] == '3g.20gb'"

  - name: nic-0
    deviceClassName: rdma.nvidia.com
    deviceSelector: "device['sriovType'] == 'vf'"
    
  - name: nic-1
    deviceClassName: rdma.nvidia.com
    deviceSelector: "device['sriovType'] == 'vf'"

  constraints:
  - requests: ["mig-0", "mig-1"]
    matchAttribute: parentUUID 
  - matchAttribute: k8s.io/pcieRoot 
```

Author: We use "RequestName" elsewhere, so I am using "RequestNames" (not "Requests") also here.

Reviewer: Actuall, thinking about this a bit more -- should it be `DeviceName` instead of `RequestName` since the thing we are requesting is always a `device` now? Likewise, should `requests` become `devices` or am I taking this too far...

Reviewer: it also helps justify a (possible) decision to drop `device.` from the CEL expressions

Author: I find it clearer to say "a claim requests devices" and then actually have a "requests" field. But I can also live with renaming to "devices".

The API convention is `<kind>Name` when referencing some separate object with a known kind, so we shouldn't rename `deviceClassName` -> `className`.

Reviewer 2: I think it makes sense to rename to `devices` because:
- If we have some `gizmos` in the future, we may want different request structures
- When (if) we add per-device allocatable resources, we probably want to use `requests` to represent those. Which means we would have `claim.spec.requests[*].requests` which is kind of weird. `claim.spec.devices[*].requests` will make more sense.
- For constraints and configs, we will then have `claim.spec.constraints[*].deviceNames` - when we have `gizmos` we may want to apply constraints differently

Author: Suppose we rename "requests" to "devices". What do we call the entries in that slice? A "device"?

More specifically, how do we refer to their name? @johnbelamaric  suggested "deviceNames" for constraints and configs and presumably "deviceName" for  `RequestAllocationResult` and the core `ResourceClaim` for a container.

That's a bit problematic:
- The `RequestAllocationResult` already contains a `deviceName` field, so there is a name clash right there in the same struct. Besides, the KEP becomes harder to understand when "device name" means different things depending on the context.
- `deviceName` looks odd to me when multiple devices get allocated. Example:

```yaml
containers:
   ...
   claims:
   - name: my-gpus
     deviceName: gpus # more than one GPU device
```

Currently, that is:
```yaml
containers:
   ...
   claims:
   - name: my-gpus
     requestName: gpus
```

Perhaps `deviceRequests` instead of just `requests`? Then we can use `deviceRequestName[s]` and call the things in the slice "device requests".

Reviewer 2: Yeah, good points. I also didn't love `deviceName` referring to multiple devices, and we have already used it elsewhere. `deviceRequests` is sort of long. :shrug: 

I am ok with either leaving it `requests` or changing it to `deviceRequests`. If forced to pick, I would probably pick `deviceRequests` for the reasons I gave earlier.

Author: I'm okay with `deviceRequests`, no strong opinion.

@klueska?

Author: Okay. I'll keep the thread open as a reminder and for other reviewers.

Reviewer: I'm not a fan of the nesting approach myself. Mostly because it is less flexible (what happens when I want to match an attribute from one element of in group 1 and one element in group 2)? But also because I find it confusing to have to specify constraints at two different levels. In my mental model, I first set up the requests to ask for a set of devices, then I come back and specify the constraints that need to be met between subsets of them.

Reviewer 2: Yeah, I see your point Tim, but I actually think the nesting is not any easier to read or understand, and it is less flexible.

Kevin's mental model is similar to mine. It's "filter down to the broad set of devices I want", then "align that set as needed".

Reviewer 3: > what happens when I want to match an attribute from one element in group 1 and one element in group 2

I'd say you laid out your groups wrong.  Or I'd say "show me the use case".

> I actually think the nesting is not any easier to read or understand

OK, well if that's the consensus, then my point is moot.  *I* find it easier to read, but *I* dreamed it up, so ...

I do still want to argue naming and structure for expressions.  Copying from Kevin's comment above:

```
apiVersion: resource.k8s.io/v1alpha2
kind: ResourceClaim
metadata:
  name: mig-devices-and-nics
spec:
  requests:
  - name: mig-0
    deviceClassName: gpu.nvidia.com
    deviceSelectors: "device['type'] == 'MIG' && device['profile'] == '3g.20gb'"
    
  - name: mig-1
    deviceClassName: gpu.nvidia.com
    deviceSelectors: "device['type'] == 'MIG' && device['profile'] == '3g.20gb'"

  - name: nic-0
    deviceClassName: rdma.nvidia.com
    deviceSelector: "device['sriovType'] == 'vf'"
    
  - name: nic-1
    deviceClassName: rdma.nvidia.com
    deviceSelector: "device['sriovType'] == 'vf'"

  constraints:
  - requests: ["mig-0", "mig-1"]
    matchAttribute: parentUUID 
  - matchAttribute: k8s.io/pcieRoot 
```

could be:

```
apiVersion: resource.k8s.io/v1alpha2
kind: ResourceClaim
metadata:
  name: mig-devices-and-nics
spec:
  requests:
  - name: mig-0
    deviceClassName: gpu.nvidia.com
    constraints:
      expression: "device['type'] == 'MIG' && device['profile'] == '3g.20gb'"
    
  - name: mig-1
    deviceClassName: gpu.nvidia.com
    constraints:
      expression: "device['type'] == 'MIG' && device['profile'] == '3g.20gb'"

  - name: nic-0
    deviceClassName: rdma.nvidia.com
    constraints:
      expression: "device['sriovType'] == 'vf'"
    
  - name: nic-1
    deviceClassName: rdma.nvidia.com
    constraints:
      expression: "device['sriovType'] == 'vf'"

  constraints:
  - requests: ["mig-0", "mig-1"]
    matchAttribute: parentUUID 
  - matchAttribute: k8s.io/pcieRoot 
```

Reviewer 2: Either that, or they should be the same object. So, I allow `expression` and `matchAttribute` in both places. But `requests` wouldn't make sense in the per-request constraints. And you could end up with unsatisfiable combinations (though you can already write and always false CEL expression; but that's within an expression, not across two different fields).

Configuration can be embedded in the claim for all devices at the claim level
and separately for each request. These configuration parameters are ignored by
the scheduler when selecting devices. They get passed down to the DRA drivers

> which provide the devices when preparing the devices on a node.

Reviewer: In theory, we could pull configuration up to the claim-level only if we had a way to reference which requests a specific configuration applies to (similar to my proposal for matchAttributes).

Author: I'm undecided whether that makes the API simpler.

Reviewer: I think it probably is the rare case, but it is a necessary case. I always go back to the MPS example, where I need to start an MPS server to govern a set of GPUs (that may be selected across different requests).

Author: Let's keep the common case simple, i.e. have configs associated with a request. The rare case is supported by also allowing configs associated with the claim.

This is the opposite of what we do with constraints, but there the common case (= apply to all devices) is the opposite, so doing it differently there is IMHO justified.

Reviewer: OK, I still think it meakse sense to include a `RequestNames` here though, to mimic what we do with constraints and allow us to provide a config across a subset of requests.

Author: That's a good point.

I'm a bit worried that it'll become confusing where to put "per-device" configuration. It could go into the request or into the `claim.spec.config` with a single request name.

So perhaps only `claim.spec.config` after all?

@johnbelamaric ?

Reviewer: I would be fine (possibly prefer) doing it only at the top.

Reviewer 2: Let's  do just `claim.spec.config`, it mirrors `constraints`, and I expect the common case to be "no config".

Reviewer 2: To be clear, I am suggesting `config.spec.config[*].requestNames` (or `deviceNames` as it were), listing the requests to which the config applies.

Reviewer: Yes, I think we are all in agreement.

Author: Okay, changed.

Note that this also affects the `AllocationResult`.  I dropped "filtering": before, `RequestAllocationResult` contained only configuration parameters for the driver which provided the device in that request. Now `AllocationResult.Config` contains everything that was listed in claim or class and drivers need to pick out those parameters that are relevant for them and ignore the rest.

Reviewer 2: The text above still implies it is embedded in the request object.

Author: Text fixed, but I am keeping this open for a bit longer until I have confirmation that the config restructuring is okay. Not a blocker, we can still revise if actually implementing it hits any snags.

A DeviceClass can contain the same device selector and device configuration
parameters. Those get added to what is specified in the claim when a class gets

> referenced.

Reviewer: Which takes precedence when a the configuration is a class and a claim conflict?

Reviewer 2: AIUI, both get passed to the driver, which makes the decision. Patrick, can the driver tell which came from class and which from claim?

Author: Yes. There is `DeviceConfiguration.Admin` for that.

belonging to the node with a `DeleteCollection` call that uses the node name in
a field filter. This ensures that no pods depending in DRA get scheduled to the
node until the required DRA drivers have started up again (node reboot) and
reconnected to kubelet (kubelet restart). It also ensures that drivers which
don't get started up again at all don't leave stale `ResourceSlices`
behind. Garbage collection does not help in this case because the node object
still exists. For the same reasons, the ResourceSlices belonging to a driver
get removed when the driver unregisters, this time with a field filter for node
name and driver name.

Deleting `ResourceSlices` is possible because all information in them can be
reconstructed by the driver. This has no effect on already allocated claims
because the allocation result is tracked in those claims, not the
`ResourceSlice` objects (see [below](#state-and-communication)).

Embedded inside each `ResourceSlice` is the representation of one or more device.

```yaml
kind: ResourceSlice
apiVersion: resource.k8s.io/v1alpha3
...
spec:
  nodeName: worker-1
  driverName: cards.dra.example.com
  devices:
  - name: card-1
    attributes:

>     - name: manufacturer # a vendor-specific attribute, automatically qualified as cards.dra.example.com/manufacturer

Author: Agreed. The CEL expression as defined in this KEP already requires qualification.

        memory: "64Mi"
        cpu: "50m"
      claims:
      - name: "gpu"
```

This request triggers allocation on a node that has a GPU device or fraction of a GPU device
with at least 2Gi of memory and then the Pod runs on that node.
The lifecycle of the allocation is tied to the lifecycle of the Pod.

In production, a similar PodTemplateSpec in a Deployment will be used.

### Publishing node resources

The devices available on a node need to be published to the API server. In
the typical case, this is expected to be published by the on-node driver
as described in the next paragraph. However, the source of this data may vary; for
example, a cloud provider controller could populate this based upon information
from the cloud provider API.

In the kubelet case, each driver running on a node publishes a set of

> `ResourceSlice` objects to the API server for its own resources, using its

Reviewer: There's been a huge debate about this back and forth over the past few months. The final consensus was that we have `ResourceSlice`s that contain a list of devices.

because the allocation result is tracked in those claims, not the
`ResourceSlice` objects (see [below](#state-and-communication)).

Embedded inside each `ResourceSlice` is the representation of one or more devices.

```yaml
kind: ResourceSlice
apiVersion: resource.k8s.io/v1alpha3
...
spec:
  # The node name indicates the node.
  # Each driver on a node provides pools of devices for allocation,
  # with unique device names inside each pool.
  # Usually, but not necessarily, that pool name is the same as the
  # node name.
  nodeName: worker-1
  poolName: worker-1
  driverName: cards.dra.example.com
  devices:
  - name: card-1 # unique inside the worker-1 pool
    attributes:
    - name: manufacturer # a vendor-specific attribute, automatically qualified as cards.dra.example.com/manufacturer
      string: Cards-are-us Inc.
    - name: productName:
      string: ACME T1000 16GB
    - name: driverVersion
      version: 1.2.3
    - name: runtimeVersion
      string: 11.1.42

>     - name: memory

Reviewer 2: Yes, this is what you match using `device.attributes`. However, we allocate only whole devices in 1.31, not fractional devices. So, you do not allocate *device-specific resources* in 1.31. Instead, you can have a device selector that says that the device must have more then `2Gi`, with `device.attributes`. But we still give you the whole device.

The only sharing available will be:
* User-mediated sharing - explicitly point multiple pods at the same claim
* Sharing of physical devices via partitioning - effectively give whole devices, but those devices may be a pre-defined fractional chunk of a physical device. The valid partitions present as individual devices.

Fractional devices / platform-mediated sharing / per-device allocatable resources are all future work.

      bool: true
    - name: dra.k8s.io/pciRoot # a fictional standardized attribute, not actually part of this KEP
      string: pci-root-0
```

Compared to labels, attributes have values of exactly one type. As
described later on, these attributes can be used in CEL expressions to select a
specific resource for allocation on a node.

To avoid any future conflicts, we reserve any attributes with the ".k8s.io/" domain prefix
for future use and standardization by Kubernetes. This could be used to describe
topology across resources from different vendors, for example, but this is out-
of-scope for now.

**Note:** If a driver needs to remove a device or change its attributes,
then there is a risk that a claim gets allocated based on the old
`ResourceSlice`. The scheduler must handle
scenarios where more devices are allocated than available. The kubelet plugin
of a DRA driver ***must*** double-check that the allocated devices are still
available when NodePrepareResource is called. If not, the pod cannot start until
the device comes back. Checking it at admission time and treating this as a fatal error
would allow us to delete the pod and trying again with a new one, but is not done

> at the moment because admission checks cannot be retried if a check finds

Author: Transient errors include "DRA driver currently not running" or some transient error in that driver itself, so yes, this was seen as something that isn't uncommon and should be handled via retries.

> at the moment because admission checks cannot be retried if a check finds

Reviewer: I had commented on this previously [here](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/pull/4709#discussion_r1632252544) (which has now been lost in the "resolved" comments hell) and patrick updated the text based on this.

I said:
> At present we don't do anything for DRA during pod admission. Everything is done at container start. We wanted to do it at pod-admission, but there is no retry loop during pod-admission. We need to be able to handle transient failures in calls to NodePrepareResources and NodeUnprepareResources(), so until there is a way to do this in the pod-admission loop, we are stuck doing things at container start.

I'm still not 100% happy with the current text either, but this is where we landed.

> at the moment because admission checks cannot be retried if a check finds

Author: @klueska also took (okay, was given...) the action item to explain better how kubelet interacts with the DRA drivers on the node. That section is currently under-specified.

> at the moment because admission checks cannot be retried if a check finds

Author: I created https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/issues/125542

a transient problem.

### Using structured parameters

A ResourceClaim is a request to allocate one or more devices. Each request in a
claim may reference a pre-defined DeviceClass to narrow down which devices are
desired or describe that directly in the request itself through one or more device
selectors. A device selector is a CEL expression that must evaluate to true if a

> device satisfies the request. A special `device` variable provides access to

Reviewer 2: Ok. I don't think this decision needs to gate the KEP; we can work it out at implementation time. Maybe add an UNRESOLVED section?

> device satisfies the request. A special `device` variable provides access to

Author: Add an `UNRESOLVED` for this. I agree that we can decide later, ideally by discussing pros and cons in that issue.

because the allocation result is tracked in those claims, not the
`ResourceSlice` objects (see [below](#state-and-communication)).

#### Devices as a named list of attributes

Embedded inside each `ResourceSlice` is a list of one or more devices, represented as a named list of attributes.

```yaml
kind: ResourceSlice
apiVersion: resource.k8s.io/v1alpha3
...
spec:
  # The node name indicates the node.
  # Each driver on a node provides pools of devices for allocation,
  # with unique device names inside each pool.
  # Usually, but not necessarily, that pool name is the same as the
  # node name.

>   nodeName: worker-1

Reviewer: There was a long discussion on this [here](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/pull/4709#discussion_r1632268296).

We finally settled on making `PoolName` required and `NodeName` / `NodeSelector` the one-of to distinguish between node-local and network-attached devices.

The biggest issue for me being (as quoted from that thread):
> The main thing I don't like about the way things are currently proposed is that the canonical name can either be:
> 
> <driver name>/<node name>/<device name>; OR
> <driver name>/<pool name>/<device name>; OR
> <driver name>/<device name>
>
> There must be some way to ensure the canonical name is always built in the same way AND ensure that when devices are node-local that the kubelet and node-local drivers are properly authorized.

To which I proposed (and everyone agreed):
> What about:
> 
> 1. PoolName is required
> 1. NodeName and NodeSelector are mutually exclusive.
> 1. If you're node-local you set NodeName
> 1. If you're network attached, you set NodeSelector
>
> This then give the canonical name of `<driver name>/<pool name>/<device name>` in all cases and provides some symmetry with `NodeName` vs. `NodeSelector` in the name of the field you have to set for node-local vs. network-attached devices.

  poolName: worker-1
  driverName: cards.dra.example.com
  devices:
  - name: card-1 # unique inside the worker-1 pool
    attributes:
    - name: manufacturer # a vendor-specific attribute, automatically qualified as cards.dra.example.com/manufacturer
      string: Cards-are-us Inc.
    - name: productName:

>       string: ACME T1000 16GB

Reviewer: We intentionally make them *not* include the `Value` suffix. This is because we would have preferred not to have the `Value` suffix on the go type at all. There was a long discussion on why we had to do this at one point, which I'm sure Patrick has a reference to somewhere.

>       string: ACME T1000 16GB

Author: We wanted the YAML names to be short, but then had to add the `Value` suffix in the Go code because API types must have a `String()` method and thus cannot have a `String` field.

There's a comment about that above the Go fields.

    - name: driverVersion
      version: 1.2.3
    - name: runtimeVersion
      string: 11.1.42
    - name: memory
      quantity: 16Gi
    - name: powerSavingSupported
      bool: true
    - name: dra.k8s.io/pciRoot # a fictional standardized attribute, not actually part of this KEP
      string: pci-root-0
```

Compared to labels, attributes have values of exactly one type. As
described later on, these attributes can be used in CEL expressions to select a
specific resource for allocation on a node.

> To avoid any future conflicts, we reserve any attributes with the ".k8s.io/" domain prefix

Author: Added to next update.

devices *may* exceed the total amount available in the `SharedCapacity` object.
This allows one, for example, to provide a way of logically partition a device
into a set of overlapping sub-devices, each of which "could" be allocated by a
scheduler (just not at the same time).

As such, scheduler support will need to be added to track the set of
`SharedCapacity` objects provided by each `ResourceSlice` as well as perform
the following steps to decide if a given device is a candidate for allocation
or not:

1. Look at the set of `SharedCapacityConsumed` objects referenced by the device
1. For each `SharedCapacityConsumed` object, look and see how much capacity is still available in the `SharedCapacity` object it is tracking with the same name
1. If enough capacity is still available in the `SharedCapacity` object to satisfy the device's consumption, continue to consider it for allocation
1. If not enough capacity is available, move on to the next device
1. Upon deciding to allocate a device, subtract all of the capacity in its `SharedCapacityConsumed` objects from the corresponding `SharedCapacity` objects being tracked

> 1. Upon freeing a device, add all of the capacity in its `SharedCapacityConsumed` objects back into the corresponding `SharedCapacity` objects being tracked

Reviewer: @alculquicondor I just added this text today, which has some (minor) scheduler implications.

Author: [Looked good](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/pull/4709#pullrequestreview-2113871842) to him, resolving.

is described as "subtracting" and "adding" capacity in the `SharedCapacity`
object, these activities are not written back to the `ResourceSlice` itself.
Just like all summaries of current allocations, they are maintained in-memory
by the scheduler based on the totality of device allocations recorded in all
claim statuses.

As an example, consider the following YAML which declares shared capacity for a
set of "memory" blocks within a GPU. Multiple devices (including the full GPU)
are defined which consume some number of these memory blocks at varying
physical locations within GPU memory. With this in place, the scheduler is free
to choose any device that matches a provided device selector, so long as no
other devices have already been allocated that consume overlapping memory
blocks.

```yaml
kind: ResourceSlice
apiVersion: resource.k8s.io/v1alpha3
...
spec:
  # The node name indicates the node.
  # Each driver on a node provides pools of devices for allocation,
  # with unique device names inside each pool.
  # Usually, but not necessarily, that pool name is the same as the
  # node name.
  nodeName: worker-1
  poolName: worker-1
  driverName: gpu.dra.example.com
  sharedCapacity:

>   - name: gpu-0-memory-block-0

Reviewer 4: What if big gpus with say ~100 slices come in the future? Do we have to then explicitly list all possible partitions? The object size will become too big.

Author: https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/pull/4709#issuecomment-2164181005

Reviewer 3: Oh gross.  I just realized this is describing shared resources as per-slice and then jamming it into the existing device struct.  So yeah, if you have a machine with 8 GPUs and each GPU has 16 memory blocks, you end up with 8*16 = 128 items with the exact same names but for the indices, and the exact same capacities, plus 31 device definitions (assuming naturally aligned partitions), all with mostly the same attributes.  Is that right? 

I had to write a program to visualize it: https://go.dev/play/p/KY_4x4tOJzk

With just about the most reductive naming I can imagine and NO OTHER attributes besides memory, this is 50K of boilerplate.  Expanding the names to match this example makes it 60K.  Adding a couple of attributes (literally 2) makes it 80K.

These are not huge numbers on their own BUT I think we agree that attributes are likely to be more than just 3, and the multiplier effect is pretty large (every attribute is repeated ~250 times in this example).

I am afraid that this will be a sticking point for future progress.  Pulling attributes to a per-pool common list is one step.  I am open to other ideas for how to scale down the redundant repetitive duplicated information.

Aside from that, I recall a thread on the evolution prototype about whether something like:

```
ResourceSlice:
  devices:
  - name: aaa
  - name: bbb
  - name: ccc
```

where device was a simple struct, and 

```
ResourceSlice:
  partitionableDevices:
  - name: aaa
    partitions:
    - name: aaa-1
    - name: aaa-2
    - name: aaa-3
  - name: bbb
    partitions:
    - name: bbb-1
    - name: bbb-2
    - name: bbb-3
  - name: ccc
    partitions:
    - name: ccc-1
    - name: ccc-2
    - name: ccc-3
```

or

```
ResourceSlice:
  devices:
  - partitioned:
      name: aaa
      partitions:
      - name: aaa-1
      - name: aaa-2
      - name: aaa-3
  - partitioned:
    name: bbb
      partitions:
      - name: bbb-1
      - name: bbb-2
      - name: bbb-3
  - partitioned:
    name: ccc
      partitions:
      - name: ccc-1
      - name: ccc-2
      - name: ccc-3
```

where `partitionableDevice` was a more complex struct, which left room for other "forms" of devices.  What happened to that discussion?  The advantage here being that the `sharedCapacity` would be per "partitionableDevice" not per pool, making the names shorter automatically (though not less redundant).

Reviewer: Even if we were to push `partitions` into the device like this (which I'm not a fan of), we still end up with the same amount of redundant code (as you mentioned). 

If the only concern is to make names shorter, I would prefer to do that like I proposed here https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/wg-device-management/pull/27#discussion_r1634768662. Because this supports pulling from both on-chip and off-chip shared resources to define a device (if available). From my perspective its also simpler to parse / reason than nested devices would be.

i.e.
```
apiVersion: resource.k8s.io/v1alpha3
kind: ResourceSlice
metadata:
  name: <uuid>
spec:
  driver: gpu.nvidia.com
  poolName: node0
  nodeName: node0
  sharedCapacity:
  - name: gpu-0-shared-capacity
    resources: 
    - name: memory
      capacity: 40Gi
    - name: compute
      capacity: 180
  - name: gpu-1-shared-capacity
    resources: 
    - name: memory
      capacity: 40Gi
    - name: compute
      capacity: 180
  devices:
  - name: gpu-0
    sharedCapacityConsumed:
    - name: gpu-0-shared-capacity
      resources: 
      - name: memory
        capacity: 40Gi
      - name: compute
        capacity: 180
  - name: gpu-0-first-half
    sharedCapacityConsumed:
    - name: gpu-0-shared-capacity
      resources: 
      - name: memory
        capacity: 20Gi
      - name: compute
        capacity: 90
  - name: gpu-0-second-half
    sharedCapacityConsumed:
    - name: gpu-0-shared-capacity
      resources: 
      - name: memory
        capacity: 20Gi
      - name: compute
        capacity: 90
  - name: gpu-1
    sharedCapacityConsumed:
    - name: gpu-1-shared-capacity
      resources: 
      - name: memory
        capacity: 40Gi
      - name: compute
        capacity: 180
  - name: gpu-1-first-half
    sharedCapacityConsumed:
    - name: gpu-1-shared-capacity
      resources: 
      - name: memory
        capacity: 20Gi
      - name: compute
        capacity: 90
  - name: gpu-1-second-half
    sharedCapacityConsumed:
    - name: gpu-1-shared-capacity
      resources: 
      - name: memory
        capacity: 20Gi
      - name: compute
        capacity: 90
```

Reviewer: Also, in terms of memory blocks specifically, this is another argument for introducing something like my proposed  [`intRange` type](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/wg-device-management/pull/6/files#diff-bf61dad125edb47c64e4ea2df7f4690a79e4588b3decdec1b97c603870270db0).

Each memory block range can then be represented as a range (or comma separated list of non-overlapping ranges) of integers, rather than requiring one entry per block.

i.e.:
```yaml
kind: ResourceSlice
apiVersion: resource.k8s.io/v1alpha3
  # The node name indicates the node.
  # Each driver on a node provides pools of devices for allocation,
  # with unique device names inside each pool.
  # Usually, but not necessarily, that pool name is the same as the
  # node name.
  nodeName: worker-1
  poolName: worker-1
  driverName: gpu.dra.example.com
  sharedCapacity:
  - name: gpu-0-memory-blocks
    intRange: "0-3"
 devices:
  - name: gpu-0
    attributes:
    - name: memory
      quantity: 40Gi
    sharedCapacityConsumed:
    - name: gpu-0-memory-blocks
      intRange: "0-3"
  - name: gpu-0-first-half
    attributes:
    - name: memory
      intRange: 20Gi
    sharedCapacityConsumed:
    - name: gpu-0-memory-blocks
      intRange: "0-1"
  - name: gpu-0-second-half
    attributes:
    - name: memory
      quantity: 20Gi
    sharedCapacityConsumed:
    - name: gpu-0-memory-blocks
      intRange: "2-3"
  - name: gpu-0-middle-half
    attributes:
    - name: memory
      quantity: 20Gi
    sharedCapacityConsumed:
    - name: gpu-0-memory-blocks
      intRange: "1-2"
 - name: gpu-0-first-quarter
    attributes:
    - name: memory
      intRange: 10Gi
    sharedCapacityConsumed:
    - name: gpu-0-memory-blocks
      intRange: "0"
 - name: gpu-0-second-quarter
    attributes:
    - name: memory
      quantity: 10Gi
    sharedCapacityConsumed:
    - name: gpu-0-memory-blocks
      intRange: "1"
 - name: gpu-0-third-quarter
    attributes:
    - name: memory
      quantity: 10Gi
    sharedCapacityConsumed:
    - name: gpu-0-memory-blocks
      intRange: "2"
 - name: gpu-0-fourth-quarter
    attributes:
    - name: memory
      quantity: 10Gi
    sharedCapacityConsumed:
    - name: gpu-0-memory-blocks
      intRange: "3"
```

Reviewer: It doesn't. That was just an example of a hypothetical device that didn't care about alignment (just that the scheduler should have the capability to allocate either the full device, or two halves of a device). Because of the way the scheduler component of this works, once it decided to allocate a half of the device, only the other half would be available (because not enough of the shared memory / compute resources would be available to allow the full device to be allocated). It was purposefully simplified for illustration purposes.

What you are describe: "a device that supports any power of two size, as long as it is aligned on a multiple of the size", would need to be modeled differently. We don't have a compact way to represent that yet, but I could imagine adding one a new field to the one-of (i.e. the one with either a `Quantity` or a `IntRange) which could represent that compactly.

Reviewer 2: Take a look at https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/wg-device-management/issues/20#issuecomment-2168189769 - in particular Option 4. I think it:
1) Is quite understandable
2) in the non-partitioned case reduces to "common attributes"
3) reduces boilerplate by a factor of 10

Int-range would shrink it a bit more.

>     capacity: 1

Reviewer 2: Yes, there are several other shared resources like total memory that may be consumed differently. They are left out of the example for simplicity. Though maybe it ends up fully constrained just by the slices, in the current GPU cases. I am not sure.

>     capacity: 1

Reviewer 3: Ahh, yes, I recall now.  This is how we would represent non-partitioned resource requests.  OK

>     capacity: 1

Reviewer: I, personally, never liked the idea of using capacity to represent something like memory blocks.

To me it is much more natural to represent this as the following in `SharedCapacity`:
```
- name: gpu-0-memory-blocks
   intRange: "0-4"
```
and then in each device's `SharedCapacityConsumed` have, e.g.:
```
- name: gpu-0-memory-blocks
   intRange: "0-1"

- name: gpu-0-memory-blocks
   intRange: "1-2"

...
```
The argument was made, however, that we should support `capacity` as the _**only**_ way to represent shared resources of this type, so this is where we landed.

  - name: gpu-0-memory-block-1
    capacity: 1
  - name: gpu-0-memory-block-2
    capacity: 1
  - name: gpu-0-memory-block-3
    capacity: 1
  devices:
  - name: gpu-0
    attributes:

>     - name: memory

Reviewer: I had proposed something similar [here](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/wg-device-management/commit/cd5ba42134bf730d34a1c5106968beef97353af4), which unfortunately never got much attention, and was reverted by Patrick as "out of scope" for 1.31.

In that proposal I actually suggested that we remove all `Quantity` fields from `DeviceAttributes` and instead list them in a device as either (1) part of consuming some `SharedCapacity` or (2) as a `LocalCapacity`.

Users could then request these capacities in a Claim independent of the CEL expression (which is just for attributes) in a dedicated `resources` field (just like we have in the pod spec for "normal" resource requests).

e.g.
```
    - name: gpu-request
      deviceClassName: acme-gpu
      selectors:
      - expression: device.attributes["cudaComputeCapability"].isGreaterThan(semver("8.0")) 
      resources:
          memory: 40Gi
```

Expanding the CEL to have `capacity` instead of just `attributes` would work just as well though.

>     - name: memory

Reviewer 2: Yes, I think that's better too. I prefer to keep allocatable things separate from attributes; I had this in various iterations in the past. But we pulled out allocatable because of scope.

"Allocatable Capacity" is theoretically a subset of "quantity typed". If we put all "quantity typed" attributes in "Capacity", does that actually make sense? Are there things that are quantity values, that we don't want to treat as consumable? If we don't put all quantity typed things in `capacity`, how will a user know when to use `device.attributes` and `device.capacity` in the CEL?

In the earlier prototypes, I separated it so CEL operates on attributes, and you have `requests` to allocate from `capacity`. This was sort of put aside though since we are not doing fractional devices. With only whole device allocation, it makes sense to do things like "memory >= 40Gi" to select the whole card, so we had to put memory into attributes.

I guess we could still create the *API* for partial allocation now, even if actual allocation is whole device. So if the user makes a claim with requests for "10Gi", we will still grant them the whole GPU. 

In that case, it would look a lot closer to what I expect the final shape to be (ie, claims would have a per-device resource requests field, in addition to a selector expression, amount field, and constraints on the set).

>     - name: memory

Reviewer 3: > In that proposal I actually suggested that we remove all Quantity fields from DeviceAttributes

If we move allocatable things out of attributes, then this seems reasonable to me, though we would need to bring back `IntValue`, probably.  I doubt that there are non-capacity attributes that benefit from quantityt notation, but if that is wrong, we could bring it back.

> Users could then request these capacities in a Claim

I think that is ultimately coming, without much doubt.  I also thing it makes sense to drop it from this release.  That doesn't mean that we shouldn't start segregating "attribs" from "capacity".  In this release people can treat `capacity[]` as a 2nd set of attributes and constrain against it.  Later they make requests against it.

> I guess we could still create the API for partial allocation now, even if actual allocation is whole device. So if the user makes a claim with requests for "10Gi", we will still grant them the whole GPU.

We don't need to put the `requests` API in yet - just let people reference `dev.capacity["memory"]` in CEL.  "I want a GPU with at least 20Gi of memory, but I get the whole device".  When we add `requests` the "at least" will be implied, but you will get _only_ 20Gi.

      quantity: 40Gi

>     sharedCapacityConsumed:

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
    consumesSharedCapacity:
```
?

Reviewer 2: tried that, feedback from api review (well, Tim), was "nouns not verbs" for the fields. So, `sharedCapacityConsumed` is a noun ("shared capacity") with a adjective qualifier ("consumed"). There's probably some fancy grammar term for an adjective that is the past tense of a verb, but I don't know it.

    - name: gpu-0-memory-block-2
      capacity: 1
  - name: gpu-0-fourth-quarter
    attributes:
    - name: memory
      quantity: 10Gi
    sharedCapacityConsumed:
    - name: gpu-0-memory-block-3
      capacity: 1
```

In this example, `gpu-0-first-half` and `gpu-0-second-half` could be allocated
simultaneouly (because the set of `gpu-0-memory-block`s they consume are
mutually exclusive). However, `gpu-0-first-half` and `gpu-0-first-quarter`
could not (because `gpu-0-memory-block-0` is consumed completely by both of
them).

### Using structured parameters

A ResourceClaim is a request to allocate one or more devices. Each request in a
claim may reference a pre-defined DeviceClass to narrow down which devices are
desired or describe that directly in the request itself through one or more device
selectors. A device selector is a CEL expression that must evaluate to true if a
device satisfies the request. A special `device` variable provides access to
the attributes of a device.

To correlate different devices, a claim may have "match attributes". Those are
the names of attributes whose values must be the same for all devices that get
allocated for the claim.

> Configuration parameters can be embedded in the claim so that they apply

Reviewer 4: Will we have cases where only certain pods can specify certain parameters or that is out of scope?

Author: I see it as out-of-scope. We have separation between admin (class) and user (claim) configuration parameters and some idea how to limit access of users to those classes (not in scope for 1.31, but could come later).

Controlling what users put into claims implies a deeper understanding of them than Kubernetes has, so I see that as the role of vendor-specific admission webhook.

  ResourceClaim (directly or through a template) and ensure that the
  resource is allocated before the Pod gets scheduled, similar to
  https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/master/pkg/controller/volume/scheduling/scheduler_binder.go
- Kubelet must be extended to manage ResourceClaims
  and to call a kubelet plugin. That plugin returns CDI device ID(s)
  which then must be passed to the container runtime.

A DRA driver can have the following components:
- *admission webhook* (optional): a central component which checks the opaque
  configuration parameters in ResourceClaims, ResourceClaimTemplates and DeviceClasses at
  the time that they are created. Without this, invalid parameters can only

>   be detected when a Pod is about to run on a node.

Reviewer: So this will allow us to return an error at claim creation time and block it from being created if the CRD embedded in the config is not valid?

Author: Yes.

- *kubelet plugin* (required): a component which publishes device information
  and cooperates with kubelet to prepare the usage of the devices on a node.

A [utility library](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/tree/master/staging/src/k8s.io/dynamic-resource-allocation) for DRA drivers was developed.
It does not have to be used by drivers, therefore it is not described further
in this KEP.

### State and communication

> A ResourceClaim object defines what devices are needed and what
> the parameters for them are. It is owned by users and namespaced. Additional

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A ResourceClaim object defines what devices are needed and what parameters should be used to configure them once allocated. It is owned by a user and namespaced. Additional
```

parameters are provided by a cluster admin in DeviceClass objects.

> The ResourceClaim spec is immutable. The ResourceClaim

Reviewer: Is this still true? I seem to remember there was some talk about making it mutable...

Author: I suggested it, but @thockin and @johnbelamaric didn't like that, so it's still immutable.

  being deallocated. Because that is visible in the claim status, scheduling
  of the second pod cannot proceed.

### Sharing a single ResourceClaim

Pods reference resource claims in a new `pod.spec.resourceClaims` list. Each
resource in that list can then be made available to one or more containers in

> that Pod. Contains can also get access to a specific requested devices when the
> claims asked for more than one.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
that Pod. Containers can also get access to a specific requested devices in cases where a
claim has asked for more than one.
```

Depending on the capabilities defined in the
`claim.status.allocation`, a ResourceClaim can be used exclusively
by one pod at a time or an unlimited number of pods. Support for additional
constraints (maximum number of pods, maximum number of nodes) could be

> added once there are use cases for those.

Reviewer: Is this based on the `Sharable` field (which it sounds like we may be dropping support for)?

Author: Removed the part about "Depending on the capabilities.." because now all claims are shareable.

  being deallocated. Because that is visible in the claim status, scheduling
  of the second pod cannot proceed.

> ### Custom parameters

Author: The 3063 KEP has lots of details about the scheduler implementation, including this recovery mechanism. I agree that this should be moved, it's just a lot of churn and perhaps not something that we need to tackle right now?

  resource is allocated before the Pod gets scheduled, similar to
  https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/master/pkg/controller/volume/scheduling/scheduler_binder.go
- Kubelet must be extended to manage ResourceClaims
  and to call a kubelet plugin. That plugin returns CDI device ID(s)
  which then must be passed to the container runtime.

A DRA driver can have the following components:

> - *admission webhook* (optional): a central component which checks the opaque

Reviewer 4: We could also provide a sample for this in DRA sample repo.

Author: I created https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/dra-example-driver/issues/49

##### ResourceSlice

For each node, one or more ResourceSlice objects get created. The drivers
on a node publish them with the node as the owner, so they get deleted when a node goes
down and then gets removed.

All list types are atomic because that makes tracking the owner for
server-side-apply (SSA) simpler. Patching individual list elements is not
needed and there is a single owner.

```go
// One of more slices represent a pool of devices managed by a given driver. For
// node-local devices, each node is a pool. How many slices the driver uses
// to publish that pool is driver-specific. Within each pool the device name must

> // be unique.

Reviewer: > Within each pool the device name must be unique.

This is confusing to me -- why would the unique name not be called "pool name" in this case?

Reviewer: Or are you trying to say: "Each device in a given pool must have a unique name"?

Author: It's "each device in a given pool must have a unique name".

> // One of more slices represent a pool of devices managed by a given driver. For
> // node-local devices, each node is a pool. How many slices the driver uses
> // to publish that pool is driver-specific. Within each pool the device name must
> // be unique.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
// One or more slices represent a pool of devices managed by a given driver. For
// node-local devices, each node is a pool. How many slices the driver uses
// to publish that pool is driver-specific. Within each pool the device name must
// be unique.
```

//

> // In which slice a device gets published may change over time. The unique identifier
> // for a node-local device is the tuple `<driver name>/<node name>/<device name>`. Each
> // of these names is a DNS label or domain, so it is okay to concatenate them
> // like this in a string with a slash as separator.
> //
> // Whenever a driver needs to update a pool, it bumps the pool generation number
> // and updates the slices with that new number and new device definitions. A consumer
> // must only use device definitions from the slices with the highest generation number
> // and ignore the others.
> //
> // If necessary, a consumer can check the number of total devices in a pool (included
> // in each slice) to determine whether its view of a pool is complete.
> //
> // For devices that are not local to a node, the node name is not set. Instead,
> // a pool name is chosen by the driver if necessary. It can be left blank if the
> // device names are unique in the entire cluster. The unique identifier then
> // has the same format as before with `<driver name>[/<pool name>]/<device name>`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
// The slice in which a device gets published may change over time. The unique identifier
// for a node-local device is the tuple `<driver name>/<node name>/<device name>`. Each
// of these names is a DNS label or domain, so it is okay to concatenate them
// like this in a string with a slash as separator.
//
// Whenever a driver needs to update a pool, it bumps the pool generation number
// and updates all slices with that new number and any new device definitions. A consumer
// must only use device definitions from slices with the highest generation number
// and ignore all others.
//
// If necessary, a consumer can check the number of total devices in a pool (included
// in each slice) to determine whether its view of a pool is complete.
//
// For devices that are not local to a node, the node name is not set. Instead,
// a pool name is chosen by the driver as necessary. It can be left blank if the
// device names are unique in the entire cluster. The unique identifier then
// has the same format as before with `<driver name>[/<pool name>]/<device name>`.
```

type ResourceSlice struct {
    metav1.TypeMeta
    // Standard object metadata
    // +optional
    metav1.ObjectMeta

    Spec ResourceSliceSpec

    // A status might get added later.
}

type ResourceSliceSpec struct {
    // NodeName identifies the node which provides the devices. All devices
    // are local to that node and part of a per-node pool.
    //
    // This field can be used to limit access from nodes to slices with
    // the same node name. It also indicates to autoscalers that adding
    // new nodes of the same type as some old node might also make new
    // devices available.
    //
    // NodeName and PoolName are mutually exclusive.
    //
    // +optional
    NodeName string

    // PoolName can be used to describe pools of devices which are not local
    // to a node. It can be left blank if the device names are unique in the cluster.
    //
    // It must not be longer than 253 and must consist of one or more DNS sub-domains
    // separated by slashes.
    //
    // +optional

>     PoolName string

Reviewer: Do we really need two names? Can't `PoolName` just be the `NodeName` in cases where all devices are node local?

Author: We can group "PoolName" and "NodeSelector" under "Pool", a struct containing "Name" and "NodeSelector".

The "NodeName" and "Pool" are properly mutually exclusive.

Reviewer: I guess the confusing thing to me is that whether we are node-local or not, we still talk about having a "pool" of devices. Which (putting on my hat as a new-comer to this) would imply to me that I should have a `PoolName` in both cases. 

I don't have a suggestion off the top of my head to avoid this (or an alternate name for this), but it's worth noting how confusing this is.

Reviewer: Could we require both `PoolName` and `NodeSelector` and in the single node case, set `NodeSelector` to the one and only node where the devices are available?

Author: If we do that, then it's unclear whether such a `ResourcePoolSlice` is about node-local resources.

A driver might manage a fabric-attached device which happens to be available only on one node. We cannot infer from `NodeSelector` to "local to this node", which is relevant for authorizing kubelet and node-local drivers.

We would need a boolean to make that unambiguous:
- `PoolName`: name of the pool, optional for network-attached devices
- `NodeLocal`: if true, the devices are local to a node and the `PoolName` has to be the node name; has to be available for field filters
- `NodeSelector`: optional, mutually exclusive with `NodeLocal`.

Then when kubelet does its deletecollection, it has to use `poolName=<node name>,nodeLocal=true`.

Reviewer: OK. this is worse.

The main thing I don't like about the way things are currently proposed is that the canonical name can either be:
1. `<driver name>/<node name>/<device name>`; OR
1. `<driver name>/<pool name>/<device name>`; OR
1. `<driver name>/<device name>`

There must be some way to ensure the canonical name is always built in the same way AND ensure that when devices are node-local that the kubelet and node-local drivers are properly authorized.

Author: Yes, but which way? :cry: 

I now tend to describe the device ID as `<driver name>[/<pool name>]/<device name>`, with `<pool name>` == `<node name>` as special case for local devices. Not sure whether that makes it easier to digest.

How about this:
```
    // For node-local devices, this is the name of their node. It also serves as the pool name.
    //
    // NodeName and NonLocal are mutually exclusive.
    //
    // +optional
    NodeName string

    // NonLocal must be set when the devices are not local to a node.
    //
    // NodeName and NonLocal are mutually exclusive.
    //
    // +optional
    NonLocal *NonLocal

...

type NonLocal struct {
   // The pool name if device names are not globally unique.
   // +optional
   PoolName string

   // Where devices can be used. If nil, they can be used in the entire cluster.
   // +optional
   NodeSelector *v1.NodeSelector
}
```

Reviewer: What about:
1. `PoolName` is required
2. `NodeName` and `NodeSelector` are mutually exclusive. 
3. If you're node-local you set `NodeName`
4. If you're network attached, you set `NodeSelector`
```
This then give the canonical name of `<driver name>/<pool name>/<device name>` in all cases and provides some symmetry with `NodeName` vs. `NodeSelector` in the name of the field you have to set for node-local vs. network-attached devices.

Author: Do we require that "PoolName" == "NodeName" if both are set or do we only make it a suggestion?

I'm fine either way.

Author: Does `PoolName` really have to be required? It might not be needed when device names are globally unique.

Author: I'm fine with requiring it, driver authors can always provide "global" if they cannot leave it empty - I just want to be sure.

Reviewer: I would say PoolName == NodeName is a suggestion (but it doesn’t have to be so long as it is globally unique) and yes it should be required so we don’t have to over explain the canonical naming convention.

>     // The generation gets bumped in all slices of a pool whenever device
>     // definitions changed. A consumer must only use device definitions from the slices
>     // with the highest generation number and ignore the others.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    // The generation gets bumped in all slices of a pool whenever device
    // definitions change. A consumer must only use device definitions from slices
    // with the highest generation number and ignore all others.
```

>     PoolGeneration int64

Author: TODO (can be decided during implementation): can `metadata.generation` be used instead of creating a new field?

I tried with the current `ResourceSlice` implementation in 1.30 and could set `metadata.generation` on create, but not bump it during patching (tried `kubectl apply` and `kubectl apply --server-side`). Perhaps it would work if the type had a different support for the field.

Author: No, `metadata.generation` on updates is not possible:
https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/6ba9fa89fb5889550649bfde847c742a55d3d29c/staging/src/k8s.io/apiserver/pkg/registry/rest/update.go#L122-L127

That seems mandatory for all resources, so we have to use a separate field for this cross-resources generation.

    // Defines which nodes have access to the devices in the pool.
    // Must not be set when the node name is set.
    //
    // If the node name is not set and this field is unset, devices
    // are accessible in the entire cluster.
    //
    // +optional
    NodeSelector *v1.NodeSelector

    // DriverName identifies the DRA driver providing the capacity information.
    // A field selector can be used to list only ResourceSlice
    // objects with a certain driver name.
    //
    // Must be a DNS subdomain and should end with a DNS domain owned by the
    // vendor of the driver.
    DriverName string

    // The total number of devices in the pool.
    // Consumers can use this to check whether they have
    // seen all slices.

>     TotalDeviceNumber int64

Reviewer: Would `TotalDeviceCount` be a better name?

Author: Yes.

Reviewer: I don't think it technically matters, but maybe renaming this to `PoolDeviceCount` would be appropriate. We have `PoolName`, `PoolGeneration`, etc. and now this is the count of devices in that pool.

Author: Let's use `PoolDeviceCount`. There's a nice symmetry to it.

I prefer the count of devices over count of slices because it is information that may be useful to a user when looking at one slice. The number of slices is less interesting and also could change more often.

    // Devices lists all available devices in this pool.
    //
    // Must not have more than 128 entries.
    Devices []Device

    // FUTURE EXTENSION: some other kind of list, should we ever need it.
    // Old clients seeing an empty Devices field can safely ignore the (to
    // them) empty pool.
}

const ResourceSliceMaxDevices = 128
```

The ResourceSlice object holds the information about available devices.
Together, the slices form a pool of devices that can be allocated.

A status is not strictly needed because
the information in the allocated claim statuses is sufficient to determine

> which of those devices are allocated for claims.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
which devices are allocated to which claims.
```

However, despite the finalizer on the claims it could happen that a well
intentioned but poorly informed user deletes a claim while it is in use.
Therefore adding a status is a useful future extension. That status will
include information about reserved devices (set by schedulers before
allocating a claim) and in-use resources (set by the kubelet). This then
enables conflict resolution when multiple schedulers schedule pods to the same
node because they would be required to set a reservation before proceeding with
the allocation. It also enables detecting inconsistencies and taking actions to
fix those, like deleting pods which use a deleted claim.

```go
// Device represents one individual hardware instance that can be selected based
// on its attributes.
type Device struct {
    // Name is unique identifier among all devices managed by
    // the driver on the node. It must be a DNS label.
    Name string

>     // Attributes defines the attributes of this device.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    // Attributes defines the set of attributes for this device.
```

    // (e.g. "the_name") or a DNS subdomain followed by a slash ("/")
    // followed by a C-style identifier
    // (e.g. "example.com/the_name"). Attributes whose name does not
    // include the domain prefix are assumed to be part of the driver's
    // domain. Attributes defined by 3rd parties must include the domain
    // prefix.
    //
    // The maximum length for the DNS subdomain is 63 characters (same as
    // for driver names) and the maximum length of the C-style identifier
    // is 32.
    Name string

    // The Go field names below have a Value suffix to avoid a conflict between the
    // field "String" and the corresponding method. That method is required.
    // The Kubernetes API is defined without that suffix to keep it more natural.

    // QuantityValue is a quantity.
    QuantityValue *resource.Quantity
    // BoolValue is a true/false value.
    BoolValue *bool
    // StringValue is a string. Must not be longer than 64 characters.
    StringValue *string
    // VersionValue is a semantic version according to semver.org spec 2.0.0.
    // Must not be longer than 64 characters.
    VersionValue *string
}

const DeviceAttributeMaxIDLength = 32

> const DeviceAttributeMaxValueLength = 64

Reviewer: What are these exactly? We've never talked about an Attribute ID...

Author: An attribute name consists of a domain prefix and an identifier part. That's what I meant with "ID" here.

Reviewer: OK, its still confusing to me without context though since we never use this name anywhere else. I'm also not quite sure what the Attribute Value is -- does this only apply to the `string` based attributes?

Author: Added comments.

```

##### DeviceClass

```go
// DeviceClass is a vendor or admin-provided resource that contains
// device configuration and requirements. It can be referenced in
// the device requests of a claim to apply these presets.
// Cluster scoped.
type DeviceClass struct {
    metav1.TypeMeta
    // Standard object metadata
    // +optional
    metav1.ObjectMeta

    // Config defines configuration parameters that apply to each device which is claimed via this class.
    // Some classses may potentially be satisfied by multiple drivers, so each instance of a vendor
    // configuration applies to exactly one driver.
    //
    // They are passed to the driver, but are not consider while allocating the claim.
    //
    // +optional
    // +listType=atomic
    Config []ConfigurationParameters

    // Requirements must be satisfied by devices. Applies to all devices of
    // a claim when the claim references the class and only to the devices
    // in a request when referenced there.
    //
    // +optional
    // +listType=atomic

>     Requirements []Requirement

Reviewer: For aesthetic purposes, I would list the requirements before the config in this struct.

Author: Okay.

Author: Changed the order and using "Selectors" now.

}

const ResourceSliceMaxDevices = 128
```

The ResourceSlice object holds the information about available devices.
Together, the slices form a pool of devices that can be allocated.

A status is not strictly needed because
the information in the allocated claim statuses is sufficient to determine
which of those devices are allocated for claims.

However, despite the finalizer on the claims it could happen that a well
intentioned but poorly informed user deletes a claim while it is in use.
Therefore adding a status is a useful future extension. That status will
include information about reserved devices (set by schedulers before
allocating a claim) and in-use resources (set by the kubelet). This then
enables conflict resolution when multiple schedulers schedule pods to the same
node because they would be required to set a reservation before proceeding with
the allocation. It also enables detecting inconsistencies and taking actions to
fix those, like deleting pods which use a deleted claim.

```go
// Device represents one individual hardware instance that can be selected based
// on its attributes.
type Device struct {
    // Name is unique identifier among all devices managed by

>     // the driver on the node. It must be a DNS label.

Author: Updated.

    // then only gets checked at runtime.
    //
    // Unknown keys are not an error. Instead, `device.<type>Attributes`
    // returns a default value for each type:
    // - empty string
    // - false for a boolean
    // - zero quantity
    // - 0.0.0 for a version
    //
    // `device.attributes` returns nil.
    //
    // The `device.driverName` string variable can be used to check for a specific
    // driver explicitly in a filter that is meant to work for devices from
    // different vendors. It is provided by Kubernetes and matches the
    // `driverName` from the ResourceSlice which provides the device.
    //
    // The CEL expression is applied to *all* available devices from any driver.
    // Because of the defaults, it is safe to reference and use attribute values
    // without checking first whether they are set. For this to work without
    // ambiguity, attribute names have to be fully-qualified.
    //
    // Some examples:
    //    device.quantityAttributes["memory.dra.example.com"].isGreaterThan(quantity("1Gi")) # >= 1Gi
    //    "memory.dra.example.com" in device.attributes # attribute is set
    //
    // +optional

>     DeviceSelector *string

Author: Consistency with VAP is a good point.

I'm okay with this.

I would keep the `device.` prefix though, see https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/wg-device-management/issues/23#issuecomment-2160044359.

// for a device is the tuple `<driver name>/<pool name>/<device name>`. Driver name
// and device name don't contain slashes, so it is okay to concatenate them
// like this in a string with a slash as separator. The pool name itself may contain
// additional slashes.
//
// Whenever a driver needs to update a pool, it bumps the pool generation number
// and updates all slices with that new number and any new device definitions. A consumer
// must only use device definitions from slices with the highest generation number
// and ignore all others.
//
// If necessary, a consumer can check the number of total devices in a pool (included
// in each slice) to determine whether its view of a pool is complete.
//
// For devices that are not local to a node, the node name is not set. Instead,
// a pool name is chosen by the driver as necessary. It can be left blank if the
// device names are unique in the entire cluster. The unique identifier then
// has the same format as before with `<driver name>[/<pool name>]/<device name>`.
type ResourceSlice struct {
    metav1.TypeMeta
    // Standard object metadata

>     // +optional

Reviewer 2: How can this be optional?

Author: This is common practice - perhaps because in some scenarios (embedding?) the field may be empty?

https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/541cfa2b87c341e6789fed8a6f22277185ab151e/staging/src/k8s.io/api/core/v1/types.go#L4758-L4761

    // new nodes of the same type as some old node might also make new
    // devices available.
    //
    // NodeName and NodeSelector are mutually exclusive.
    // If both are unset, then the devices are available in the
    // entire cluster.
    //
    // +optional
    NodeName string

    // Defines which nodes have access to the devices in the pool.
    // Must not be set when the node name is set.
    //
    // NodeName and NodeSelector are mutually exclusive.
    // If both are unset, then the devices are available in the
    // entire cluster.
    //
    // +optional
    NodeSelector *v1.NodeSelector

    // The generation gets bumped in all slices of a pool whenever device
    // definitions change. A consumer must only use device definitions from slices
    // with the highest generation number and ignore all others.
    PoolGeneration int64

    // The total number of devices in the pool.
    // Consumers can use this to check whether they have
    // seen all slices.
    PoolDeviceCount int64

    // Devices lists all available devices in this pool.
    //
    // Must not have more than 128 entries.
    Devices []Device

>     // FUTURE EXTENSION: some other kind of list, should we ever need it.

Reviewer 2: Let's include the [partitionable device model](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/wg-device-management/pull/27/files#r1634768662) here, too.

Author: I can add here that we want to add it, but not the model itself - I don't feel qualified to explain it.

Reviewer: I will look at adding text for it tomorrow.

Author: I'm quite confused by https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/wg-device-management/pull/27/files#r1634768662 as it stands now and left several comments there.

Reviewer: I am working on the text here:
https://github.com/pohly/enhancements/pull/18

Author: Thanks! I included it.

  being deallocated. Because that is visible in the claim status, scheduling
  of the second pod cannot proceed.

### Sharing a single ResourceClaim

Pods reference resource claims in a new `pod.spec.resourceClaims` list. Each
resource in that list can then be made available to one or more containers in
that Pod. Containers can also get access to a specific requested devices in cases where a
claim has asked for more than one.

Consumers of a ResourceClaim are listed in `claim.status.reservedFor`. They
don't need to be Pods. At the moment, Kubernetes itself only handles Pods and
allocation for Pods.

> The only limit on the number of concurrent consumers is the maximum size of

Author: It is bounded.

needed and there is a single owner.

```go
// One or more slices represent a pool of devices managed by a given driver.
// How many slices the driver uses to publish that pool is driver-specific.
// Each device in a given pool must have a unique name.
//
// The slice in which a device gets published may change over time. The unique identifier
// for a device is the tuple `<driver name>/<pool name>/<device name>`. Driver name
// and device name don't contain slashes, so it is okay to concatenate them
// like this in a string with a slash as separator. The pool name itself may contain
// additional slashes.
//

> // Whenever a driver needs to update a pool, it bumps the pool generation number

Author: For the "give me access to all devices on a node" use case (both with and without admin access) the scheduler needs to be sure that it knows about "all" devices. From `PoolDeviceCount` it knows how many it should know and from `PoolGeneration` it knows which out-dated slices it needs to ignore when looking for those devices. This addresses the very likely problem of a new node being created, driver starting to publish slices (plural!) and at the same time scheduling the daemonset with "monitor all devices".

There is still the problem that "all" devices can change over time. This isn't addressed, but perhaps it's good enough?

I don't see how we can easily support a "wildcard" allocation which then makes a varying number of devices available to a container. That would ripple through the entire stack right down to the container runtimes. Most likely, a daemonset pod will have to be kill and re-scheduled when the number of devices changes. With the current API, the new pod then has access to "all" devices again. What we lack is a mechanism for killing such pods.

// and updates all slices with that new number and any new device definitions. A consumer
// must only use device definitions from slices with the highest generation number
// and ignore all others.
//
// If necessary, a consumer can check the number of total devices in a pool (included
// in each slice) to determine whether its view of a pool is complete.
//
// For devices that are not local to a node, the node name is not set. Instead,
// the driver may use a node selector to specify where the devices are available.
type ResourceSlice struct {
    metav1.TypeMeta
    // Standard object metadata
    // +optional
    metav1.ObjectMeta

    Spec ResourceSliceSpec

    Status ResourceSliceStatus
}

type ResourceSliceSpec struct {
    // DriverName identifies the DRA driver providing the capacity information.
    // A field selector can be used to list only ResourceSlice
    // objects with a certain driver name.
    //
    // Must be a DNS subdomain and should end with a DNS domain owned by the

>     // vendor of the driver.

Author: I'm still unsure what `+required` is good for besides clarity because I've not seen an effect on generated code, but I agree that it makes sense to add it for the sake of clarity.

I'm adding a TODO for the next update and the implementation.

    DriverName string

    // PoolName is used to identify devices. For node-local devices, this
    // is often the node name, but this is not required.
    //
    // It must not be longer than 253 and must consist of one or more DNS sub-domains
    // separated by slashes.
    PoolName string

    // NodeName identifies the node which provides the devices.
    // A field selector can be used to list only ResourceSlice
    // objects belonging to a certain node.
    //
    // This field can be used to limit access from nodes to slices with
    // the same node name. It also indicates to autoscalers that adding
    // new nodes of the same type as some old node might also make new
    // devices available.
    //
    // NodeName and NodeSelector are mutually exclusive.
    // If both are unset, then the devices are available in the
    // entire cluster.
    //
    // +optional

>     NodeName string

Author: Ack.

    // Defines which nodes have access to the devices in the pool.
    // Must not be set when the node name is set.
    //
    // NodeName and NodeSelector are mutually exclusive.

>     // If both are unset, then the devices are available in the

Author: I was going back and forth between that and the current statement myself. If I'm not mistaken, "empty NodeSelector" normally means "no nodes".

Having said that, I'm fine with "empty NodeSelector" = "all nodes" in this case.

    // entire cluster.
    //
    // +optional
    NodeSelector *v1.NodeSelector

    // The generation gets bumped in all slices of a pool whenever device

>     // definitions change. A consumer must only use device definitions from slices

Author: Ack. See https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/pull/4709#discussion_r1642593833 for a more complete discussion.

    // with the highest generation number and ignore all others.
    PoolGeneration int64

>     // The total number of devices in the pool.

Reviewer 2: Yes, that's a good point, and more how I was originally thinking of it too. The scheduler doesn't care if it has a complete view when it is trying to scheduler; it either succeeds or fails.

Is there a specific scenario where that's not good enough?

>     // The total number of devices in the pool.

Author: The intent is that the scheduler waits at least in cases where it matters ("all devices"). See https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/pull/4709#discussion_r1642593833 for a more complete discussion.

We could also say "always wait". That doesn't matter much for other cases at the moment (if it knows about enough devices to satisfy a claim, adding more to choose from doesn't change much), but once we have scoring it would be good to not make a choice based on known incomplete information.

>     // The total number of devices in the pool.

Reviewer 2: The "all" case makes this necessary, I agree.

    // Consumers can use this to check whether they have
    // seen all slices.
    PoolDeviceCount int64

    // SharedCapacity defines the set of shared capacity consumable by
    // devices in this ResourceSlice.
    //

>     // Must not have more than 128 entries.

Reviewer: I don't necessarily share this concern. I don't think it will actually be a problem in practice.

As a vendor, I **really** like the ability to reason separately about any possible `SharedCapacity`and the concrete set of `Devices` I want the scheduler to be able to allocate on my behalf. 

This is my mental model as a vendor:

1. Simple devices are nothing more than a named list of attributes. I create an array of strings to represent each device and I attach some attributes to each of them. Users can then select on these attributes to help narrow down the scheduler's choice of which device to pick.  

1. Complex devices can have both attributes and some number of quantifiable resources attached to them (what we've been calling `capacity`). These quantifiable resources are either local to a device, or pulled from some shared pool. Just as before, I enumerate the full set of devices I want the scheduler to be able to allocate and attach some attributes to them. If the devices have some local "capacity" they want to advertise, I add this too. If a device needs to pull some "capacity" from a shared pool, I make sure there is an entry in the top level `SharedCapacity` that defines the "limit" of this shared resources, and then advertise how much of this shared `capacity` will be made available to users if the scheduler decides to pick this device.

>     // Must not have more than 128 entries.

Reviewer 3: You don't share which concern?  It seems inevitable to be a problem.  If I have 8 GPUs and each GPU has 16 shared items (mutexes), that's the limit.  So that forces me to organize my slices dependant upon how many shared items I have.  If I have 16 memory blocks (mutex style) and 1 other counted shared resource, then I can only put 7 devices in a slice. But looking at the dgxa100 example, there are 26 "devices" per GPU, so actually I can only have 4 such devices in a slice.

Will your driver maintainers eventually just say "one card per slice is easier" and leave it at that?  IF we think that will be the common usage mode, can we lean into it and get a simpler API?  Remember many parties will have to implement this API, so simpler is a feature.

>     // Must not have more than 128 entries.

Reviewer 2: I think we're making progress on this in https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/wg-device-management/issues/20 - but I don't think it's going fast enough to make 1.31.

    // this device.
    //
    // Must not have more than 32 entries.
    //
    // +listType=atomic
    // +optional
    SharedCapacityConsumed []SharedCapacity
}

const ResourceSliceMaxAttributesPerDevice = 32
const ResourceSliceMaxSharedCapacityConsumedPerDevice = 32

// ResourceSliceMaxDevices and ResourceSliceMaxAttributesPerDevice were chosen
// so that with a maximum `DeviceAttribute` length of 96 characters and a
// maximum `SharedCapacity` length of ~40 characters (ignoring overhead), the
// total size of the ResourceSlice object is around 590KB.

// DeviceAttribute is a combination of an attribute name and its value.
// Exactly one value must be set.
type DeviceAttribute struct {
    // Name is a unique identifier for this attribute, which will be
    // referenced when selecting devices.
    //
    // Attributes are defined either by the owner of the specific driver
    // (usually the vendor) or by some 3rd party (e.g. the Kubernetes
    // project). Because attributes are sometimes compared across devices,
    // a given name is expected to mean the same thing and have the same
    // type on all devices.
    //

>     // Attribute names must be either a C-style identifier

Reviewer: I agree. It is much nicer to not be limited to C style identifiers here.

>     // Attribute names must be either a C-style identifier

Reviewer 2: +1

>     // Attribute names must be either a C-style identifier

Author: Agreed. I hadn't dropped it yet because the decision about CEL was still a bit vague, but as we now all agree I'll convert to DNS label. I will keep a max length of 32 characters, though, because our worst-case analysis of object size is very sensitive to attribute name length.

    // StringValue is a string. Must not be longer than 64 characters.
    StringValue *string
    // VersionValue is a semantic version according to semver.org spec 2.0.0.
    // Must not be longer than 64 characters.
    VersionValue *string
}

type SharedCapacity struct {
    // Name is a unique identifier among all shared capacities managed by the
    // driver in the pool.
    //
    // It is referenced both when defining the total amount of shared capacity
    // that is available, as well as by individual devices when declaring
    // how much of this shared capacity they consume.
    //
    // SharedCapacity names must be a C-style identifier (e.g. "the_name") with
    // a maximum length of 32.
    //
    // By limiting these names to a C-style identifier, the same validation can
    // be used for both these names and the identifier portion of a
    // DeviceAttribute name.
    //
    // +required
    Name string `json:"name"`

    // Capacity is the total capacity of the named resource.
    // This can either represent the total *available* capacity, or the total
    // capacity *consumed*, depending on the context where it is referenced.
    //
    // +required

>     Capacity resource.Quantity `json:"capacity"`

Reviewer: I don't see how to model MIG properly if `SharedCapacity` is just a fancy mutex. That's a fine mental model for the memory blocks, but not for the other shared resources consumed by a MIG device.

I've mentioned it several times in other threads (and the README in my [initial proposal for partitionable resources](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/wg-device-management/blob/main/nv-partitionable-resources/README.md) explains this as well), but a MIG "partition" is more than just its memory blocks -- each MIG device is defined by the number of resources it consumes from the following set (on an A100 GPU):

```
    - name: memory
      quantity: 40Gi
    - name: multiprocessors
      quantity: "98"
    - name: copy-engines
      quantity: "7"
    - name: decoders
      quantity: "5"
    - name: encoders
      quantity: "0"
    - name: jpeg-engines
      quantity: "1"
    - name: ofa-engines
      quantity: "1"
    - name: memory-slices
      intRange: 0-7
``` 

For example, a `1g.5gb` at memory-slice 0 consumes these resources:
```
      - name: memory
        quantity: 4864Mi
      - name: multiprocessors
        quantity: "14"
      - name: copy-engines
        quantity: "1"
      - name: decoders
        quantity: "0"
      - name: encoders
        quantity: "0"
      - name: jpeg-engines
        quantity: "0"
      - name: ofa-engines
        quantity: "0"
      - name: memory-slices
        intRange: "0"
```

but a `1g.5gb+me` device at memory-slice 0 consumes these:
```
      - name: memory
        quantity: 4864Mi
      - name: multiprocessors
        quantity: "14"
      - name: copy-engines
        quantity: "1"
      - name: decoders
        quantity: "1"
      - name: encoders
        quantity: "0"
      - name: jpeg-engines
        quantity: "1"
      - name: ofa-engines
        quantity: "1"
      - name: memory-slices
        intRange: "0"
```
Notice how the `1g.5gb+me` consumes a `decoder`, a `jpeg-engine` and an `ofa-engine` but the `1g.5gb` doesn't. I've used the term "overlapping" to describe how the allocation of one MIG device might influence the allocation of another MIG devices , but at the end of the day, it's really about the depletion of resources across each of these dimensions that defines whether one MIG device "overlaps" another or not.

>     Capacity resource.Quantity `json:"capacity"`

Reviewer 2: Yes, I was going to say the same thing. This example in the KEP only demonstrates the mutex function. But there are other resources that can be the limiting factor that are consumed in a pool like fashion, as Kevin describes in detail.

>     Capacity resource.Quantity `json:"capacity"`

Reviewer 3: > Notice how the 1g.5gb+me consumes a decoder, a jpeg-engine and an ofa-engine but the 1g.5gb doesn't.

I see.  And those decoders are not locked to any one partition in hardware, but are equally available to any partition?  So they are fungible within the "card" but finite in number.  OK.  That's the use-case I was missing.  Thanks.  Will recolve this thread.

>     Capacity resource.Quantity `json:"capacity"`

Reviewer: > I see. And those decoders are not locked to any one partition in hardware, but are equally available to any partition? So they are fungible within the "card" but finite in number. OK. That's the use-case I was missing. Thanks. Will recolve this thread.

Yes, with one clarification. They are not available to "any" partition -- the set they are available to is predefined (but non-linear).

of the cluster in an allocated state.

```go
type ResourceClaimSpec struct {
    // These constraints must be satisfied by the set of devices that get
    // allocated for the claim.
    Constraints []Constraint

    // Requests are individual requests for separate resources for the claim.
    // An empty list is valid and means that the claim can always be allocated
    // without needing anything. A class can be referenced to use the default
    // requests from that class.
    //
    // +listType=atomic

>     Requests []Request

Reviewer 2: can we move Requests above Constraints? Requests (or Devices if we go that way) are the main thing; Constraints and Config are refinements on them.

Reviewer: +1

Author: Done, and also shuffled around the other structs accordingly (makes the diff larger, but the end result more useful).

of the cluster in an allocated state.

```go
type ResourceClaimSpec struct {
    // This field holds configuration for multiple potential drivers which
    // could satisfy requests in this claim. The configuration applies to
    // the entire claim. It is ignored while allocating the claim.
    //
    // +optional
    // +listType=atomic

>     Config []ConfigurationParameters

Reviewer: I would list this last for aesthetic reasons

Author: Okay.

    // These constraints must be satisfied by the set of devices that get
    // allocated for the claim.
    Constraints []Constraint

    // Requests are individual requests for separate resources for the claim.
    // An empty list is valid and means that the claim can always be allocated
    // without needing anything. A class can be referenced to use the default
    // requests from that class.
    //
    // +listType=atomic
    Requests []Request

    // Future extension, ignored by older schedulers. This is fine because scoring
    // allows users to define a preference, without making it a hard requirement.
    //
    //
    // Score *SomeScoringStruct

    // Shareable indicates whether the allocated claim is meant to be shareable
    // by multiple consumers at the same time.
    // +optional

>     Shareable bool

Reviewer: The default is `true`, correct?

Author: No, it's false. We can turn this into a pointer and say "default if unset is true". I'm not a fan of defaulting, but I guess for "kubectl get" it would make sense to make that default explicit.

Or would it make sense to remove this field entirely and just silently mark all allocated claims as "sharable"?

Reviewer: I think "sharable" or "not applicable" (meaning users just don't reference the claim in more than one place) is the common case, and "exclusive" is the uncommon case.

Does it make sense to reverse this then and call it "Exclusive"?

Although, you might be right -- it might make sense to just remove this entirely. I think it made sense as a class field in the past, but maybe not as much as a claim field, especially now since classes are optional.

Author: We can go further and also remove it from the allocation result. If we don't have a good use case for it, we shouldn't implement the logic in the scheduler either.

Agreed?

Reviewer: I am happy to drop it.

Author: You can ignore this. I'm going to remove it.

}

// Constraint must have one and only one field set.
type Constraint struct {
    // All devices must have this attribute and its value must be the same.
    //
    // For example, if you specified "numa.dra.example.com" (a hypothetical example!),
    // then only devices in the same NUMA node will be chosen.
    //
    // +optional
    // +listType=atomic

>     MatchAttribute *string

Reviewer: Do we want to make this a list of strings for aesthetic purposes?

Reviewer: I don't think so -- this is what I was referring to in my comment here: https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/pull/4709#discussion_r1632369182

Author: I made `Constraint` a struct with one common field (`RequestNames`) and one-of semantic for the rest (well, the one field we have now, but we know with good confidence that more will come).

    // Future extension, not part of the current design:
    // A CEL expression which compares different devices and returns
    // true if they match.
    //
    // Because it would be part of a one-of, old schedulers will not
    // accidentally ignore this additional, for them unknown match
    // criteria.
    //
    // matcher string

> }

Reviewer: Do we need an additional field in here to list the set of devices we want to apply the constraint across? From what I understand, we have made requests[*].name required now, so there is an opportunity to list the names here now.

Reviewer 2: Oh, that's an interesting idea. It solves the other problem you raised. If each match can be limited to on or more named requests.

Reviewer: Yeah, that was my thinking

Author: Would that be useful? We could define a "RequestNames" field so that the constraint only applies to those, if non-empty. If empty, it applies to all.

Reviewer: My only concern would be if it would also be applicable to any other extensions we make beyond `matchAttributes` in the future. I think it would be though, since it only limits the total set of devices to consider for the given constraint.

Author: This could also be a way to specify a constraint for the devices inside one request: a single request name would apply to those and only to those.

Reviewer: Yes, that it would solve that use case as well...

Author: Added.

// Request is a request for one of many resources required for a claim.
// This is typically a request for a single resource like a device, but can
// also ask for one of several different alternatives.
type Request struct {
    // The name can be used to reference this request in a pod.spec.containers[].resources.claims
    // entry.
    //
    // Must be a DNS label.

>     Name string

Reviewer: I'm confused what this object is. Is this the object that sits under `containers[*].resources.claims`?

Reviewer: If so, it feels out of place at this point in the discussion. If not, what other objects *only* have a name field like this...

Reviewer: I think it's clear, it just seems out of place in the flow of the other objects declared before and after this.

Author: I'll check whether it fits elsewhere better.

Author: The main problem is that `DeviceClass` gets introduced before `ResourceClaim`. I think it flows better when we introduce the claim first because that covers all concepts, then add device class. Changed...

    *ResourceRequestDetail

    // FUTURE EXTENSION:
    //
    // OneOf contains a list of requests, only one of which must be satisfied.
    // Requests are listed in order of priority.
    //
    // +optional
    // +listType=atomic
    // OneOf []ResourceRequestDetail
}

type ResourceRequestDetail struct {
    // When referencing a DeviceClass, a request inherits additional
    // configuration and requirements.
    //
    // +optional
    DeviceClassName *string

    // Config defines configuration parameters that apply to the requested resource(s).
    // They are ignored while allocating the claim.
    //
    // +optional
    // +listType=atomic

>     Config []ConfigurationParameters

Reviewer: For aesthetic reasons, I think this should be the last field in the struct?

Author: Okay.

    // AdminAccess indicates that this is a claim for administrative access
    // to the device(s). Claims with AdminAccess are expected to be used for
    // monitoring or other management services for a device.  They ignore
    // all ordinary claims to the device with respect to access modes and
    // any resource allocations. Ability to request this kind of access is
    // controlled via ResourceQuota in the resource.k8s.io API.
    //
    // Default is false.
    //
    // +optional
    AdminAccess *bool

    // The amount field can be used to ask for all devices which match the
    // requirements or a certain fixed number. The default is exactly one device.
    //
    // Note that the overall number of allocated devices per claim is limited
    // to 32, so asking for one device in more than 32 requests and asking for
    // more than 32 identical devices in a single request are both not allowed.
    // This gets checked during validation. The number of devices matching
    // the requirements is not known in advance, so asking for "all devices"
    // can fail during allocation.
    //
    // +optional

>     Amount *Amount

Author: No, we want the one-of because "optional allocation" or "range" could be future extensions.

>     Amount *Amount

Reviewer: Again, it's unclear to me what we decided on when to inline the one-of fields vs. wrap them in a struct....

>     Amount *Amount

Author: In this case, we also need `Amount: nil` to indicate "give me the default of one device".

>     Amount *Amount

Author: Got it. I've changed to inlining.

Is "all" by itself then meaningful enough or do we need a longer name?

```
requests:
- requestName: gpus
  deviceClass: gpu.dra.example.com
  all: true
```

I think "count: 5" works.

>     Amount *Amount

Reviewer: it is possible to have a single sring field which can either be an integer, the string `all`, and in the future a range?

>     Amount *Amount

Author: Extending such a type is complicated. A range is not valid now (needs to be rejected by validation), but will become valid later, which then causes problems on downgrades.

    // Requirements describe additional contraints that all must be met by a device
    // to satisfy the request.
    //
    // +optional
    // +listType=atomic
    Requirements []Requirement
}

// Exactly one field must be set.
type Amount struct {
    // All, if set, asks for all devices matching the requirements.
    // Allocation fails if not all of them are available, unless admin
    // access is requested. Admin access is granted also for
    // devices which are in use.
    //
    // +optional

>     All bool

Reviewer: I'm not actually sure what semantics `all` should have in the non-admin use-case. I'm specifically thinking of the MIG use-case where the definition of "all" is fuzzy (since it's not actually possible to have access to *all* devices at once).

Reviewer 2: all means "all matching the requirements". So, if you said "all" with a partitionable device you would just never schedule. I am thinking the algorithm is something like:
1. Final all devices on the node matching the requirements. This may include overlapping devices, if the requirements are not refined enough.
2. Evaluate if it is possible to allocate that set; if not, this node is not a fit.

If you wanted all GPUs on a node, you would want to say "non-MIG" in your requirements (or the class would).

Reviewer: I think that would work. I couldn't do something like -- give me all GPUs on the node partitioned into X,Y,Z -- but I could actually say -- give me all MIG devices with profile `1g.5gb` and since those are non-overlapping it is actually satisfiable.

Author: The device selector would have to limit the request to those devices which actually can be allocated together.

This also would make sense for management access because listing all MIG devices in the results is redundant (some are the same card) and potentially too large (32 limit for results).

    // A fixed number of devices which match the same requirements.
    //
    // +optional
    Count *int64
}
```

The `DeviceClassName` field may be left empty. The request itself can specify which

> driver needs to provide devices. This leads to some corner cases:

Author: ```suggestion
driver needs to provide devices. There are some corner cases:
```

- Empty `claim.requests`: this is a "null request" which can be satisfied without
  allocating any device.
- Empty `claim.requests[].deviceClassName` and empty `requirements`: this is a request
  which can be satisfied by any device. This does not really make sense, but is not

>   disallowed either.

Author: I think we should treat it as an error instead of allocating some arbitrary device. That probably wasn't the intent.

Author: Changed.

    // the same ResourceClaim which may only get used by one pod at a time,
    // only one pod can be scheduled.
    //
    // Both schedulers try to add their pod to the claim.status.reservedFor
    // field, but only the update that reaches the API server first gets
    // stored. The other one fails with a conflict error and the scheduler
    // which issued it knows that it must put the pod back into the queue,
    // waiting for the ResourceClaim to become usable again.
    //
    // There can be at most 32 such reservations. This may get increased in
    // the future, but not reduced.
    //
    // +listType=map
    // +listMapKey=uid
    // +patchStrategy=merge
    // +patchMergeKey=uid
    // +optional
    ReservedFor []ResourceClaimConsumerReference
}
```

##### Allocation result

```go
// AllocationResult contains attributes of an allocated resource.
type AllocationResult struct {
    // ControllerName is the name of the DRA driver which handled the
    // allocation. That driver is also responsible for deallocating the
    // claim. It is empty when the claim can be deallocated without
    // involving a driver.
    //

>     // A driver may allocate devices provided by other drivers, so this
>     // driver name here can be different from the driver names listed in
>     // the results.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    // A driver may allocate devices provided by other drivers, so the
    // controller name here can be different from the driver names listed in
    // the results.
```

    //
    // This is an alpha field and requires enabling the DRAControlPlaneController
    // feature gate.
    //
    // +optional
    ControllerName string

    // This field holds configuration for all drivers which
    // satisfied requests in this claim. The configuration applies to
    // the entire claim.
    //
    // +optional
    // +listType=atomic

>     Config []ConfigurationParameters

Reviewer: I would put this as the last object in the struct

Author: Done.

    // Results lists all allocated devices.
    //
    // +listType=atomic
    Results []RequestAllocationResult

    // Setting this field is optional. If unset, the allocated devices are available everywhere.
    //
    // +optional
    AvailableOnNodes *v1.NodeSelector

    // Shareable determines whether the claim supports more than one consumer at a time.
    //
    // +optional

>     Shareable bool

Reviewer: Would we drop this as well in light of:
https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/pull/4709/files#r1632269363

Author: Done.

}

// AllocationResultsMaxSize represents the maximum number of
// entries in allocation.results.
const AllocationResultsMaxSize = 32

// RequestAllocationResult contains configuration and the allocation result for
// one request.
type RequestAllocationResult struct {
    // DriverName specifies the name of the DRA driver whose kubelet
    // plugin should be invoked to process the allocation once the claim is
    // needed on a node.
    //
    // Must be a DNS subdomain and should end with a DNS domain owned by the
    // vendor of the driver.

>     DriverName string

Reviewer: In light of changing to `ControllerName` should this change to `PluginName`?

Author: Then we would also have to renamed it in the ResourcePoolSlice, which then makes it awkward when that object gets published by a driver (sic!) which isn't a kubelet plugin.

I prefer to think of it as "a DRA driver has a name and provides a kubelet plugin". The plugin registers under the name of the driver.

Author: I know that the kubelet code uses "plugin name". That confused me each time I read that code.

    // Config contains all the configuration pieces that apply to the request
    // and that were meant for the driver which handles these devices.
    // They get collected during the allocation and stored here
    // to ensure that they remain available while the claim is allocated.
    //
    // Entries are list in the same order as in class.config and claim.config,
    // with class.config entries first.
    //
    // +optional

>     Config []DeviceConfiguration

Reviewer: I would put this at the end of the struct

Author: Okay.

    // RequestName identifies the request in the claim which caused this
    // device to be allocated. If a request was satisfied by multiple
    // devices, they are indexed starting with zero in the order
    // in which they are listed in the results.
    RequestName string

    // This name together with the driver name and the device name field
    // identify which device was allocated.
    //
    // For a driver with node-local devices, it is the name of the node and
    // the overall ID is `<driver name>/<node name>/<device name>`.
    //
    // For other drivers, the overall ID is `<driver name>[/pool

>     // name>]/<device name>`.

Reviewer: As mentioned above, I think we should onyl have one choice here and that should be `<driver name>/<pool name>/<device name>`. Where `PoolName` *must* be set.

Reviewer 2: +1

Author: Updated.

    //
    // Must not be longer than 253 characters and may contain one or more
    // DNS sub-domains separated by slashes.
    //
    // +optional
    PoolName string

    // DeviceName references one device instance via its name in the driver's
    // resource pool. It must be a DNS label.
    DeviceName string
}

> const PoolNameMaxLength = validation.DNS1123SubdomainMaxLength // Same as for a single node name.

Reviewer: Is this the same for here and in ResourceSlice?

Author: Moved up to `ResourceSlice`.

// DeviceConfiguration is one entry in a list of configuration pieces for a device.
type DeviceConfiguration struct {
    // Admins is true if the source of the piece was a class and thus

>     // not something that a normal user would have been able to set.

Reviewer: source of the piece?

Reviewer 2: If this means "came from the class" maybe we should just name it that way `ClassConfig` or something?

Author: "configuration piece", or just "configuration".

Author: Let's drop the "piece".

Author: I'm using "configuration parameters" when I need a plural form. "Configurations" looked odd.

Author: I've not renamed it to `ClassConfig` because I prefer to describe the semantic instead of the mechanism.

    Admin bool

>     DriverConfigurationParameters

Author: We agreed that "configuration" is a one-of, with one option right now the opaque vendor configuration. Standardized alternatives could get added later.

>     DriverConfigurationParameters

Reviewer: I guess I'm still confused as to what was decided for when we embed a struct vs. when we just put the one-of parameters inline. My understanding was that we decided to *always* put the one-of parameters inline...

>     DriverConfigurationParameters

Author: The `ConfigurationParameters` is a one-of struct because it gets embedded in a slice where we need a struct. I'm using `DriverConfigurationParameters` as a struct because it mirrors that other struct.

Inlining a single field also has another challenge. It has to be required, but at the same time has to be a pointer because it might become optional:
```
type DeviceConfiguration struct {
   Admin bool
   
    // Currently required, might become optional when alternatives are added. Check for ni!
    Opaque *runtime.RawExtension
}
```

I find the struct easier to understand.

}

// DriverConfigurationParameters must have one and only one one field set.
//
// In contrast to ConfigurationParameters, the driver name is
// not included and has to be infered from the context.
type DriverConfigurationParameters struct {
    Opaque *runtime.RawExtension

> }

Reviewer: I think we may be able to drop this, given my comment here:
https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/pull/4709/files#r1633116525

Author: ... still discussing it :grin:

Author: Changed - see https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/pull/4709#discussion_r1635970009.

    // Future extension, ignored by older schedulers. This is fine because scoring
    // allows users to define a preference, without making it a hard requirement.
    //
    //
    // Score *SomeScoringStruct

    // Shareable indicates whether the allocated claim is meant to be shareable
    // by multiple consumers at the same time.
    // +optional
    Shareable bool
}

// Constraint must have one and only one field set.
type Constraint struct {
    // All devices must have this attribute and its value must be the same.
    //
    // For example, if you specified "numa.dra.example.com" (a hypothetical example!),
    // then only devices in the same NUMA node will be chosen.
    //
    // +optional
    // +listType=atomic
    MatchAttribute *string

    // Future extension, not part of the current design:
    // A CEL expression which compares different devices and returns
    // true if they match.
    //
    // Because it would be part of a one-of, old schedulers will not
    // accidentally ignore this additional, for them unknown match
    // criteria.
    //
    // matcher string
}

// Request is a request for one of many resources required for a claim.

> // This is typically a request for a single resource like a device, but can
> // also ask for one of several different alternatives.

Author: ```suggestion
// This is typically a request for a single resource like a device, but can
// also ask for several identical devices. It might get extended to support
// asking for one of several different alternatives.
```

type Request struct {
    // The name can be used to reference this request in a pod.spec.containers[].resources.claims
    // entry.
    //
    // Must be a DNS label.
    Name string

    *ResourceRequestDetail

    // FUTURE EXTENSION:
    //
    // OneOf contains a list of requests, only one of which must be satisfied.
    // Requests are listed in order of priority.
    //
    // +optional
    // +listType=atomic
    // OneOf []ResourceRequestDetail
}

type ResourceRequestDetail struct {
    // When referencing a DeviceClass, a request inherits additional
    // configuration and requirements.
    //
    // +optional

>     DeviceClassName *string

Reviewer: I think the common case for a class will be to preselect the driver that a device is associated with. The driver implementor can provide such a class as part of the helm chart deployment for the driver.

So my only concern with requiring a class is when we want to allow selection of a device from different drivers. No single driver could provide a class to cover this use-case. The admin would need to craft a custom class that OR'd the possible drivers that the device can be selected from.

>     DeviceClassName *string

Reviewer 2: Yes, though that case we can handle for example, by having a standard attribute that the class can select on, and having a class that ships with k8s directly. For example, an attribute `resource.k8s.io/nic_type` with values `raw`, `sriov-pf`, `sriov-vf` or something. We can figure that out later.

>     DeviceClassName *string

Author: > "and using it for quota"

Let's discuss that in https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/wg-device-management/issues/24. Doing it in this PR will not be focused enough.

In that issue, I gave several examples why quota by class at admission time is not working.

> The admin would need to craft a custom class that OR'd the possible drivers that the device can be selected from.

To me, this is the biggest drawback. We create more work for admins and users and make app deployments non-portable across clusters because class names are not standardized. If it worked, it would at least be worth it, but I don't think it does.

>     DeviceClassName *string

Reviewer 2: I still think we should make class required; we can relax it in the future if we find it's not good. I don't agree the OR'd drivers will be needed, as we can solve the "cross driver class" issue with "standard attributes".

As you said, we can debate quota implementation elsewhere, but if we make this required now we don't bo ourselves in.

>     DeviceClassName *string

Author: I can live with making a class required to buy us time, but implementing a quota system based on that needs further discussion.

>     DeviceClassName *string

Reviewer 2: Ok, let's do that. thanks

>     DeviceClassName *string

Author: I've thought a bit more about it and I don't buy the argument anymore that `DeviceClassName` has to be required for everyone just because there might be an admission mechanism that depends on that.

Suppose that, hypothetically speaking, someone defined and implemented such an admission check. Then that same check can enforce that the `DeviceClass` field is set in namespaces where the check is enabled. It can remain optional if no such check gets implemented or if the namespace configuration doesn't enforce class-based quotas. Whether the field has to be set becomes part of the documentation of the cluster, together with the corresponding documentation that tells users which classes are available to them.

That gives us the best of both worlds:
- Class-based quotas can be added later or downstream with an admission webhook.
- There  is no negative effect on admins or users which don't want the mechanism.

Allowing the creation of a claim with no `DeviceClassName` before such a mechanism gets implemented falls into the same category as "admitting something before a quota gets defined or changed": it was allowed in the past and thus remains allowed. In practice, such a mechanism would probably be in place before a cluster is handed over to users.

>     DeviceClassName *string

Reviewer 2: Quota is only one reason. Other reasons:
- Consistency with storage and other areas (though not all classes are required)
- Users won't necessarily know about drivers, etc.  - class provides a way to abstract that into specific device qualities that a user understands
- I just don't think a claim without a class makes much sense. It requires a lot of user knowledge to create a meaningful claim

Given that it's easier to relax the constraint than make it required when it wasn't, it seems safest to make it required now.

>     DeviceClassName *string

Author: > Consistency with storage

We already diverged. I wouldn't say that consistency for consistencies sake should be a goal. Instead, we need to consider the pros and cons of classes in our design.

> Users won't necessarily know about drivers

That's an argument for encouraging the use of classes by vendors and in documentation. I don't disagree.

But IMHO this does not support the statement that classes must be used.

> It requires a lot of user knowledge to create a meaningful claim

Isn't that the same argument ("classes are easier")?

> Given that it's easier to relax the constraint than make it required when it wasn't

I don't agree that this matters for an alpha release. We could flip from optional to required during the promotion from alpha to beta. It becomes harder later.

Quite the opposite: by making it optional in the alpha, people can experiment with both approaches.

>     DeviceClassName *string

Author: I added an `UNRESOLVED` below as reminder that we need to re-evaluate this before beta at the latest.

@johnbelamaric: as you are the proponent of making it required, I assigned that one to you in the text.

>     DeviceClassName *string

Reviewer 2: SGTM

    // Config defines configuration parameters that apply to the requested resource(s).
    // They are ignored while allocating the claim.
    //
    // +optional
    // +listType=atomic
    Config []ConfigurationParameters

    // AdminAccess indicates that this is a claim for administrative access
    // to the device(s). Claims with AdminAccess are expected to be used for
    // monitoring or other management services for a device.  They ignore
    // all ordinary claims to the device with respect to access modes and
    // any resource allocations. Ability to request this kind of access is
    // controlled via ResourceQuota in the resource.k8s.io API.
    //
    // Default is false.
    //
    // +optional

>     AdminAccess *bool

Reviewer: I usually call it `ManagementAccess` (which is arguably just as vague as `AdminAccess`).

>     AdminAccess *bool

Author: If I remember correctly, in the prototype discussions we switched from "management access" to "admin access", but perhaps I misremember.

Let's keep it for now and collect more opinions. I don't feel strongly either way. We can still rename it as late as during the actual implementation review...

Whether we really do it like that will be discussed further in that issue and/or during
the implementation phase. Dropping it is not a conceptual change.

<<[/UNRESOLVED]>>
```

```go

// Exactly one field must be set.
type Amount struct {
    // All, if set, asks for all devices matching the selectors.
    // Allocation fails if not all of them are available, unless admin
    // access is requested. Admin access is granted also for
    // devices which are in use.
    //
    // The default if `all` and `count` are unset is to allocate one device.
    //
    // +optional
    All bool

    // A fixed number of devices which match the same selectors.
    //
    // The default if `all` and `count` are unset is to allocate one device.
    //
    // +optional
    Count *int64
}

// Besides the request name slice, constraint must have one and only one field set.
type Constraint struct {
    // The constraint applies to devices in these requests. A single entry is okay
    // and used when that request is for multiple devices.
    //
    // If empty, the constrain applies to all devices in the claim.
    //
    // +optional
    RequestNames []string

>     // The devices must have this attribute and its value must be the same.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
    // If set, then the devices must have this attribute and its value must be the same.
```

Author: Thanks, applied.

    //
    // For example, if you specified "numa.dra.example.com" (a hypothetical example!),
    // then only devices in the same NUMA node will be chosen.
    //
    // +optional
    // +listType=atomic
    MatchAttribute *string

    // Future extension, not part of the current design:
    // A CEL expression which compares different devices and returns
    // true if they match.
    //
    // Because it would be part of a one-of, old schedulers will not
    // accidentally ignore this additional, for them unknown match
    // criteria.
    //
    // matcher string
}

// Besides the request name slice, ConfigurationParameters must have one and only one field set.
type ConfigurationParameters struct {

>     // The constraint applies to devices in these requests.

Reviewer 2: s/constraint/configuration/

Author: Gotta love cut-and-paste... :sweat_smile: 

Fixed.

    // waiting for the ResourceClaim to become usable again.
    //
    // There can be at most 32 such reservations. This may get increased in
    // the future, but not reduced.
    //
    // +listType=map
    // +listMapKey=uid
    // +patchStrategy=merge
    // +patchMergeKey=uid
    // +optional
    ReservedFor []ResourceClaimConsumerReference
}
```

##### DeviceClass

```go
// DeviceClass is a vendor or admin-provided resource that contains
// device configuration and selectors. It can be referenced in
// the device requests of a claim to apply these presets.
// Cluster scoped.
type DeviceClass struct {
    metav1.TypeMeta
    // Standard object metadata
    // +optional
    metav1.ObjectMeta

    // Each selector must be satisfied by a device which is claimed via this class.
    //
    // +optional
    // +listType=atomic
    Selectors []Selector

    // Config defines configuration parameters that apply to each device that is claimed via this class.
    // Some classses may potentially be satisfied by multiple drivers, so each instance of a vendor
    // configuration applies to exactly one driver.
    //

>     // They are passed to the driver, but are not consider while allocating the claim.

Reviewer 4: s/consider/considered/

Author: Fixed.

    //
    // +optional
    // +listType=atomic

>     Config []ConfigurationParameters

Reviewer 2: This is the same struct used in the claim, and now includes `RequestNames`, which has no meaning in the Class. Should we have a different type for the class config parameters?

Author: Maybe? It's not a problem... until it becomes a problem :grin:

As it's all in ResourceSlice and very localized, I think a single struct is okay.

    //
    //
    // Score *SomeScoringStruct
}

// Request is a request for one of many resources required for a claim.
// This is typically a request for a single resource like a device, but can
// also ask for several identical devices. It might get extended to support
// asking for one of several different alternatives.
type Request struct {
    // The name can be used to reference this request in a pod.spec.containers[].resources.claims
    // entry and in a constraint of the claim.
    //
    // Must be a DNS label.
    Name string

    *RequestDetail

    // FUTURE EXTENSION:
    //
    // OneOf contains a list of requests, only one of which must be satisfied.
    // Requests are listed in order of priority.
    //
    // +optional
    // +listType=atomic
    // OneOf []RequestDetail
}

type RequestDetail struct {
    // When referencing a DeviceClass, a request inherits additional
    // configuration and selectors.
    //
    // +optional
    DeviceClassName *string

    // Each selector must be satisfied by a device which is requested.
    //
    // +optional
    // +listType=atomic
    Selectors []Selector

>     *Amount // inline, so no extra level in YAML and no separate documentation

Reviewer 3: Why not just put those fields here?

Author: Just habits, I'll inline.

Author: Actually, there is a reason. It is a *pointer* on purpose, not some embedded struct, see https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/pull/4709#discussion_r1640552271.

Reviewer 3: responded there

    // AdminAccess indicates that this is a claim for administrative access
    // to the device(s). Claims with AdminAccess are expected to be used for
    // monitoring or other management services for a device.  They ignore
    // all ordinary claims to the device with respect to access modes and
    // any resource allocations. Ability to request this kind of access is
    // controlled via ResourceQuota in the resource.k8s.io API.
    //
    // Default is false.
    //
    // +optional
    AdminAccess *bool
}
```

```
<<[UNRESOLVED @johnbelamaric ]>>

There is nothing in the current revision of the KEP which depends on device classes
being mandatory, therefore the `DeviceClassName` is optional. Before beta we need

> to decide whether we keep that or make it required. Changing after beta will be

Reviewer 3: Agreed to go required for now

    // device is suitable. This covers qualitative aspects of
    // device selection.
    //
    // The language is as defined in
    // https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/using-api/cel/
    // with several additions that are specific to device selectors.
    //
    // Attributes of a device are made available through a `device.attributes` map.
    // The value of each entry varies, depending on the attribute
    // that is being looked up.
    //
    // Unknown keys trigger a runtime error.
    //
    // The `device.driverName` string variable can be used to check for a specific
    // driver explicitly in a filter that is meant to work for devices from
    // different vendors. It is provided by Kubernetes and matches the
    // `driverName` from the ResourceSlice which provides the device.
    //
    // The CEL expression is applied to *all* available devices from any driver.
    // The expression has to check for existence of an attribute when it is not
    // certain that it is provided because runtime errors are not automatically
    // treated as "don't select device". Instead, device selection fails completely
    // and reports the error.
    //
    // Some examples:

>     //    "memory.dra.example.com" in device.attributes && # Is the attribute available?

Author: You mean the comment?

>     //    "memory.dra.example.com" in device.attributes && # Is the attribute available?

Reviewer 2: I think we are going to want to qualify them on the claim side, always. It's long but it will enable things like the composite device driver. If we end up one day with a cross-vendor `*.k8s.io/` model, maybe we can drop those in the claim side.

But here shouldn't it be `dra.example.com/memory` in any case?

>     //    "memory.dra.example.com" in device.attributes && # Is the attribute available?

Reviewer 3: I thought we had landed on NOT qualifying them, which implied the drivername prefix?

>     //    "memory.dra.example.com" in device.attributes && # Is the attribute available?

Author: We don't require them to be qualified in the ResourceSlice where the driver name is the fallback domain prefix. But in the CEL expression we agreed to always do fully-qualified because the intended driver name cannot be inferred reliably.

> But here shouldn't it be dra.example.com/memory in any case?

Yes. Will fix.

>     //    "memory.dra.example.com" in device.attributes && # Is the attribute available?

Reviewer 3: oh.  Yuck.  I guess I missed this incongruity.  Is there no way we can avoid this?  The CEL is going to be long enough as it is.

>     //    "memory.dra.example.com" in device.attributes && # Is the attribute available?

Author: Suppose we have a CEL expression `"something" in device.attributes && device.attributes["something"]` (expected type a boolean) and one device with driver name `dra.example.com`, `something`: false (= `dra.example.com/something`), `dra.k8s.io/something`: true.

Those `something` attributes have the same ID, but mean different things. Which one should be looked up by the CEL expression?

Suppose we have two different vendors which both use `something` for different things, potentially even with different types (boolean as expected, string for the other vendor). If we say "pick the vendor-qualified attribute", then the CEL above is potentially invalid because it doesn't return a boolean for the second vendor. This could be fixed by adding a `device.driverName` check, but it's not obvious that the check is missing. It'll work without that check on clusters with just that one driver and fail on clusters where the other driver is also installed.

Requiring fully-qualified names makes the CEL longer, but it avoids a lot of foot guns.

>     //    "memory.dra.example.com" in device.attributes && # Is the attribute available?

Reviewer 3: I assume that the vast majority of claims WILL have vendor checks, so the only time you need a fully qualified name is when you are comparing across vendors, and if you are comparing across vendors you probably want all your references to be fully qualified.

This is safe:
    `dev.driver == "example.com" && dev.attrs["model"] == "foo" && devattrs["version"] > "1.2.3"` 

This is unsafe:
    `dev.attrs["model"] == "foo" && devattrs["version"] > "1.2.3"` 

At risk of re-adjudicating, perhaps this is a place and reason to consider the more "nested" CEL structure, where each prefix forms a new map?  If you combine that with the `bind` (I think that was the name, I'll be damned if I can find the spec Joe linked me to in the past) idea, you get something like:

`bind(attrs, dev.attrs["example.com"], attrs.model == "foo" && attrs.version > "1.2.3"` -- the names are short and concise, but are CLEARLY intended to be vendor specific.  If you don't like the field style, we can still do:

`bind(attrs, dev.attrs["example.com"], attrs["model"] == "foo" && attrs["version"] > "1.2.3"` 

This could also fit with CEL variable:

```
selectors:
- cel:
  variables:
  - name: "xattrs"
    expresion: dev.attrs["example.com"]
  expression: xattrs["model"] == "foo" && xattrs["version"] > "1.2.3"` 
```

>     //    "memory.dra.example.com" in device.attributes && # Is the attribute available?

Reviewer 2: I think qualifications are needed (see https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/wg-device-management/pull/27#issuecomment-2155167940 for example).

I like the map of maps. I think it gets us the best of both worlds. Is there any reason not to allow the variable construct in the API in 1.31?

>     //    "memory.dra.example.com" in device.attributes && # Is the attribute available?

Reviewer: If we allow variables, would it be possible for the class to define a set of variables that can then used in the claim's expressions?

>     //    "memory.dra.example.com" in device.attributes && # Is the attribute available?

Author: > At risk of re-adjudicating, perhaps this is a place and reason to consider the more "nested" CEL structure, where each prefix forms a new map?

I'm fine with that. So basically `dev.attrs[<domain>][<id>]`, with `bind` or variables to reduce typing. Do we want to allow `dev.attrs[<domain>/id]`? It's unambiguous what the CEL is looking up (nested map or value) and it may help with simple cases (like `"dra.example.com/driverVersion" in dev.attrs`).

I don't have a strong opinion about field lookup vs. map for the leaf. Field lookup seems nicer, but we then have a mixture of styles :shrug:

> would it be possible for the class to define a set of variables that can then used in the claim's expressions?

Seems useful.

>     //    "memory.dra.example.com" in device.attributes && # Is the attribute available?

Reviewer 2: field-style would mean both a mixture of styles, and going back to C-style identifiers. I if we do map-style lookups we should not do `attrs["<domain>/id"]` anymore. Just `attrs["domain"]["id"]`.

>     //    "memory.dra.example.com" in device.attributes && # Is the attribute available?

Reviewer 2: > If we allow variables, would it be possible for the class to define a set of variables that can then used in the claim's expressions?

With required class (which we have now but I think Patrick was still uncertain about) that seems feasible. If class is not required, this won't work.

>     //    "memory.dra.example.com" in device.attributes && # Is the attribute available?

Reviewer 3: > If we allow variables, would it be possible for the class to define a set of variables that can then used in the claim's expressions?

Maybe, but I don't know we would want that?  It seems like a recipe for problems that are hard to debug.  Once you publish a class with a variable, that can't be easily changed.   It becomes part of your class API.  I suppose it would have to be treated like lexically scoped vars.  E.g. class defines "foo" and class expression can use that variable.  claim expression can use it, but can also redefine it (at a smaller scope).  It seems like a lot of hassle - we should let the use-cases emerge. 

> I'm fine with that. So basically `dev.attrs[<domain>][<id>]`

It's the double-map that I find weird.  We don't allow the `id` to have slashes or dots (so no triple maps).  IIUC we cannot prevent field lookups, so `dev.attrs["example.com"]["attrName"]` and `dev.attrs["example.com"].attrName` would work but only `dev.attrs["example.com"]["attr-name"]` (hence the earlier "C identifier" format for the leaf).

I'm really shooting for "as simple as we can get away with", meaning less options and less noise.

* Option 1: What we have specced today
Every attr in CEL is `dev.attrs["example.com/attrName"]` or `dev.attrs["example.com/attr-name"]`

* Option 2: Split attr names on `/` and document only field lookups
Attr names are C identifiers.  Every attr in CEL is `dev.attrs["example.com"].attrName` (making "attr-name" invalid).  CEL variables can ecapsulate the `dev.attrs["example.com"]` part, yielding `xattrs.attrName`.

* Option 3: Split attr names on `/` and document only map lookups
Attr names are DNS labels (ish). Every attr in CEL is `dev.attrs["example.com"]["attrName"]` or `dev.attrs["example.com"]["attr-name"]`.  CEL variables can ecapsulate the `dev.attrs["example.com"]` part, yielding `xattrs["attrName"]`.

* Option 4: Split attr names on `/` and document both field and map lookups
Same as options 2 + 3, with the caveat that only attrs whose names are C identifiers can use fields.

* Option 5: One of above + fully qualifier attrs
Pick from options 2, 3, 4 and also allow `dev.attrs["example.com/attrName"]` or `dev.attrs["example.com/attr-name"]`

> it may help with simple cases (like `"dra.example.com/driverVersion" in dev.attrs`)

The alternative being `"dra.example.com" in dev.attrs && "driverVersion" in dev.attrs["dra.example.com"]` ?  Yikes.  Figuring out a sane dialect of CEL is tricky.   Can't we find a way to let non-existient attributes just always evaluate to false?

I wanted to try this, so I went to the CEl playground:

https://playcel.undistro.io/?content=H4sIAAAAAAAAA6tWSk7NUbJSykgs1khJLdNLLCkpKo6OUUqtSMwtyEnVS87PjVGK1VRQU1PALa2XlFikYGurEKMEZMQoxeQp6SilJJYkeuYVlJYADQfqtIrJU1AA6wazFBTQzICKgsTT8vOBfIRhMPGy1KLizPw8kJwl2Irc%2FJRUoOkgD9QCAP%2FhHsfIAAAA

The CEL spec says:

"""
To test for the presence of a field, the boolean-valued macro has(e.f) can be used.

If e evaluates to a map, then has(e.f) indicates whether the string f is a key in the map (note that f must syntactically be an identifier).
"""

There's no other affordance for e being a map and f NOT being an identifier.  Instead we have to do

`"example.com" in dev.attrs && has(dev.attrs["example.com"].foo) && dev.attrs["example.com"].foo == "bar"`  

Which is pretty god-awful.  On that I guess I support both being available.  https://playcel.undistro.io/?content=H4sIAAAAAAAAA22PwQrCMAyGXyXksJN0Zwt7AJ%2FBeKhrhMHajK4OQXx30zIZk92S%2F8%2F3J3ljzyNaJOSXC9PIppfQPkQIYYjgeTEu5zRD02zNdTdNeDMKQNcB4d0lQop4Qu%2Byu8TpmTVdSUsRoNK1AvjLWNWi1%2B12C%2FvpC6d5kFi880FGu3KFOnD3tB4YxLPeVv7%2FfAHHNuSJBwEAAA%3D%3D

The playground doesn't seem to support `bind`.

>     //    "memory.dra.example.com" in device.attributes && # Is the attribute available?

Author: > >    it may help with simple cases (like "dra.example.com/driverVersion" in dev.attrs)
> The alternative being "dra.example.com" in dev.attrs && "driverVersion" in dev.attrs["dra.example.com"] ? Yikes.

Yes, exactly that is why I brought it up.

> Figuring out a sane dialect of CEL is tricky. Can't we find a way to let non-existient attributes just always evaluate to false?

That is the "lookup with defaults" approach from the Google doc, which was rejected earlier. The problem with defaults for the leaf is that the type is unknown, so we cannot return a boolean false when the users expects it, because with untyped lookup we don't know what type the user expects. If we return a boolean when an int is needed, it's still going to be a runtime error.

What we can do is always return the empty map for the domain lookup. Then the "does it exist" check becomes `"driverVersion" in dev.attrs["dra.example.com"]`.

Give that `xattrs.attrName` looks natural, I am leaning towards option 2 with this "empty map for domain lookup" as default.

There is one small implementation detail to consider: should `"dra.example.com" in dev.attrs` return `true` or `false` when there is no attribute with that domain? `false` seems what someone would expect, except that `dev.attrs["dra.example.com"]` isn't wrong.

>     //    "memory.dra.example.com" in device.attributes && # Is the attribute available?

Reviewer 2: > Give that xattrs.attrName looks natural, I am leaning towards option 2 with this "empty map for domain lookup" as default.

That could work. A few other ideas:

1) Allow an evaluation "option" (likely in the CEL struct) to provide simplified, default behavior where we validate any attribute references, and evaluate the *entire expression* to false if any looked up attribute does not exist. This means no guards are needed at all. If you want to do something complex with guards (`"x" in attrs ? attrs["x"] : attrs["y"]`), you would need to turn off the default-on option. This results in more compact expressions since no guards are needed, at the expense of "magic" that may be non-obvious coming from other parts of K8s.

2) We eliminate the implicit magic of 1) by making the user list attributes that they expect to exist, and marking the expression false if they don't exist. Sort of explicit assertions. It keeps the expressions a little simpler but is still a pain.

I think I like the default empty map best at this point, but figured I'd raise those ideas nonetheless. There may be some other things we can think of.

We might want to find some way to surface failed lookups, though, because otherwise a typo may be hard to detect. This would probably be in the claim status. One option would be that if we find an attribute not defined by *any* device in the cluster, it's probably a typo and we can surface that in the status message. Another (not mutually exclusive) option would be to include statistics on each attribute used in the expression (`attributes["example.com"].foo exists in 3 of 10,245 evaluated devices`). That could give folks a hint that they made an error (if it exists in 0 devices).

By the way, not to pull on yet another "decided" thread, but if we treated "driver" as special, and allowed it to optionally be specified up-front rather than in the CEL expression, we could get some advantages here both in early pruning of evaluations and perhaps in CEL expressions ("if you specify the driver up front, you don't have to qualify the names"?).

>     //    "memory.dra.example.com" in device.attributes && # Is the attribute available?

Author: Your two options sound like future extensions that might get added after we have more experience with a simpler approach. The same applies to the ideas how to surface problems: this is too experimental to include it in 1.31.

> That could give folks a hint that they made an error (if it exists in 0 devices).

We would need to be careful to not phrase it as an error, because it is legitimate to deploy a portable app in a cluster where only one of two alternatives exists.

> if we treated "driver" as special, and allowed it to optionally be specified up-front rather than in the CEL expression

I had that in one of my early drafts. We removed it as "too much magic". Let's not go back there.

Regarding field lookup vs. map lookup for the leaf: elsewhere today @klueska made a good point that the field syntax makes the field look too much like something that is standardized by Kubernetes. It's the same problem we discussed with plain maps in the Kubernetes API: there it looks like the keys are part of the schema, here it's the field names.

`dev.attrs["dra.example.com"]["memory"]` avoids that false impression by treating both as strings. So let me take back what I said earlier, I now prefer two-level map access over map+field.

>     //    "memory.dra.example.com" in device.attributes && # Is the attribute available?

Reviewer 3: >> That could give folks a hint that they made an error (if it exists in 0 devices).
>
> We would need to be careful to not phrase it as an error, because it is legitimate to deploy a portable app in a cluster where only one of two alternatives exists.

Agree and agree - I think we would not surface general non-matches (too many), but zero matches is sus (as my kids would say).  Question:  would we surface zero-matches if there were other conditionals that did match?  e.g. `dev.attrs.goodName == "real" || dev.attr.typoNam == "oops"` - if that matches some devices, but we don't surface zero-match cases, we might never notice the typo, but it is valid to not match on one branch of a conditional.  

> if we treated "driver" as special, and allowed it to optionally be specified up-front rather than in the CEL expression

Are we putting `driverName` in the `attrs` or should it be `dev.driver` ?

> Regarding field lookup vs. map lookup for the leaf: elsewhere today @klueska made a good point that the field syntax makes the field look too much like something that is standardized by Kubernetes. It's the same problem we discussed with plain maps in the Kubernetes API: there it looks like the keys are part of the schema, here it's the field names.

I disagree that it is problematic in this context - it's not as if there's actually a struct with this schema (`dev.attrs[*].*`) anywhere in the system - it is purely synthetic.  Also, in hindsight, the restrictions on maps was almost certainly wrong, and I think we would have done it differently if we could go back.  That said, we can't actually PREVENT field lookups, as long as the name is a valid identifier.  I slightly prefer the field-style lookup, but @pohly, I'll let you own this one.  Perhaps a compormise is the require C identifiers for names, and as we progress thru alpha and even beta, we can decide, WITH REAL USER INPUT, which style makes people happier?

>     //    "memory.dra.example.com" in device.attributes && # Is the attribute available?

Author: > Question: would we surface zero-matches if there were other conditionals that did match?

I don't think the scheduler would notice. It's not getting a runtime error if the first term of the `||` is true. This looks like a case for a "CEL linter" which looks at the AST and with better knowledge about which attributes are valid reports problems.

As I suggested in the implementation PR, a `DeviceClass` should have a `spec` and a `status` like a `ResourceClaim`. Then a condition can be used to mark "bad" classes and claims by such a linter that is running in the cluster.

> Are we putting driverName in the attrs or should it be dev.driver ?

We have `device.driverName`, which exposes `slice.spec.driverName`, so that is not an attribute.

What @johnbelamaric alluded to is putting a `DriverName string` next to the `Expression string` in the CEL selector. That can do some pre-filtering without evaluating the CEL expression and then if in the CEL expression there is ambiguity, it could be resolved as "use attributes in that driver's domain".  But as I said, too much magic.

> I slightly prefer the field-style lookup, but @pohly, I'll let you own this one.

Let's go with field-style if you aren't concerned about this aspect and because `variable.field` looks better. `dev.attrs["dra.k8s.io"]["numa"]` also could raise the question why `dev.attrs["dra.k8s.io/numa"]` isn't supported when that is how it is listed in a slice.

>     //    "memory.dra.example.com" in device.attributes && # Is the attribute available?

Reviewer 3: SGTM

Linters being async makes me a little unhappy, but I think we could revisit that if evidence suggests the need

>     //    "memory.dra.example.com" in device.attributes && # Is the attribute available?

Author: Duh!

I just rediscovered what @thockin mentioned earlier ("we cannot prevent field lookups")....

>     //    "memory.dra.example.com" in device.attributes && # Is the attribute available?

Author: > I'll be damned if I can find the spec Joe linked me to in the past) idea, you get something like:
> `bind(attrs, dev.attrs["example.com"], attrs.model == "foo" && attrs.version > "1.2.3")`

Found it: https://pkg.go.dev/github.com/google/cel-go/ext#Bindings

It has to be enabled explicitly, so I am going to do that for the CEL selector environment.

>     //    "memory.dra.example.com" in device.attributes && # Is the attribute available?

Author: Implemented in https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/pull/125488.

    //       device.attributes["memory.dra.example.com"].isGreaterThan(quantity("1Gi")) # >= 1Gi
    //    device.driverName == "dra.example.com" # any device from that driver
    //
    // +optional
    Expression *string
}
```

```
<<[UNRESOLVED @pohly ]>>

> The `device.` prefix is included in the CEL environment for the reasons given in

Author: Added to https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/wg-device-management/issues/23.

https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/wg-device-management/issues/23#issuecomment-2160044359.

Whether we really do it like that will be discussed further in that issue and/or during
the implementation phase. Dropping it is not a conceptual change.

<<[/UNRESOLVED]>>
```

```go

// Exactly one field must be set.
type Amount struct {
    // All, if set, asks for all devices matching the selectors.
    // Allocation fails if not all of them are available, unless admin
    // access is requested. Admin access is granted also for
    // devices which are in use.
    //

>     // The default if `all` and `count` are unset is to allocate one device.

Reviewer 3: Same trap as above - you can't have nothing mean something.  If we ever wanted to add a `range` option, but the client was back-rev, it would see `all` and `count` as unset and assume 1, which is wrong.

You can't even get away with saying that the apiserver will default count to 1 if no other field is set.  If you have a modern client and a back-rev apiserver, and the client passes `range` (which the apiserver doesn't know about), the default will kick in, corrupting the client's intention.

AFAICT your choices are:

1) never add to this one-of and rely on "nothing set" = default

2) require exactly 1 field, which means trivial use-cases have to say `count: 1`

3) add a discriminator, if the discriminator is not set it gets defaulted to "Exact".  Any other mode REQUIRES the discriminator be set.

We don't often do the discriminator thing in k8s.  We have made the mistake several times and found ourselves in case 1 (e.g. NetworkPolicy).  We usually can make case 2 work.  In this case I think you might want 3.

Simple case: say nothing, get default `CountMode: Exact` and `Count: 1`

If I want 2: set `CountMode: Exact` and `Count: 2`

If I want all: set `CountMode: All`

If I want a range: set `CountMode: Range` and `Range: { min: 1, max: 4 }`

Reviewer 2: Ahh. That makes sense. I think the discriminator is probably what we want here.

Author: The `Amount` struct is referenced via a pointer in `RequestDetail`. Therefore if we add a `range`, the back-rev client will see a pointer to an empty struct, which is safe.

The "if `all` and `count` are unset" is how the users sees it and therefore how the documentation is written. What the apiserver and client see is a nil `*Amount` pointer.

Reviewer 2: So, you are saying, "nil" means 1, but "empty" means "there must be something I don't now"; that is, we can differentiate as it is written, no need to change?

Reviewer 3: I don't think so.  It's too clever and depends on the content-type and language/library details.

E.g. we support JSON as a transport.  A forward-rev sender who sends `range` will unmarshall as a `nil` Amount in the receiver:  https://go.dev/play/p/eQGyV5_UsIV

Also what does it mean if I pass `all: false` and nothing else?

Author: > A forward-rev sender who sends range will unmarshall as a nil Amount in the receiver: https://go.dev/play/p/eQGyV5_UsIV

Ack. That is where it breaks down.

> 3. add a discriminator, if the discriminator is not set it gets defaulted to "Exact". Any other mode REQUIRES the discriminator be set.
>
> Simple case: say nothing, get default CountMode: Exact and Count: 1

Does that literally have to be server-side defaulting or can we say that nil CountMode is the same as "Exact" and in that case, nil Count is the same as 1?

It's a bit odd to send `CountMode: Range` and `Range: { min: 1, max: 4 }` and then see a default `Count: 1` - okay, so we could only set that default for `CountMode: Exact`... hmm.

Reviewer 3: defaults:
```
if x.CountMode == nil {
  x.CountMode == Exact
}
if numFieldsSet(x) == 0 {
  x.Count = 1
}
```

validation:
```
if x.CountMode == nil {
  // error: required
}
switch x.CountMode {
case Exact:
    if Count <= 0 {
        // error: GTZ
    }
case All:
  // do nothing
case Range:
  if x.Min <= 0 {
    // error: GTZ
  }
  if x.Max > 128 {
    // error?
  }
  if x.Min > x.Max {
    // error
  }
```

You could MAYBE cross-check (e.g. Range is not set when mode=Exact, Range and Count are not set when mode=All), too.

Author: I'm not sure whether I like the `CountMode` discriminator. I'm going with an extra level and a pointer to one-of struct for now in the implementation (`Amount: Count: 5`, `Amount: All: true`).

Reviewer 3: We can fight in API review, if you prefer.  

Adding a nesting COULD solve the "nothing means something" problem, but only if the `Amount` field is itself a pointer (despite not really being optional):

https://go.dev/play/p/ig-JnD0jcn9
  vs
https://go.dev/play/p/EW39t7lCqIG

This feels like playing tricks with unmarshalling, and I worry about clients or protocols which might not be so clever.    Also, I really dislike `All bool`.

Reviewer: For the record, I really dislike `All bool` as well, but don't see a way around it unless we define a new type, which can either be an integer (represented as a string) or the special keyword "all".

Then you can have e.g. `count: "1"`, `count: "2"`, or `count: "all"`.

Author: This count "type" would have to be stored as a string to avoid issues with round-tripping. We do the same for semver.

The problem with "extend it" is that if version X+1 allows `count: "1-3"` and stores that, then downgrading to X where that wasn't allowed yet leads to an object which isn't valid. That causes all kinds of nastiness, I think even not being able to delete it.

Author: Let's continue here, but I also added a cross-reference in https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/pull/125488/commits/d4b048c8b33cac6c045aa5d029aab4e405671fce#r1647009797.

@thockin: if we allow `countMode: exact` and `countMode: all` in 1.31 and validation rejects everything else, how do we add `countMode: range` later? At first glance it has the same problem with downgrades. Or does validation perhaps only get applied on creation? On updates, we already need to check for "spec not modified", so if that passes, perhaps we can simply skip the entire spec validation?

Author: If we do that, then the `count: all` suggested by @klueska may be the simplest approach.

Author: > This count "type" would have to be stored as a string to avoid issues with round-tripping.

But as we probably want to allow `count: 1`, an [IntOrString](https://pkg.go.dev/github.com/kubernetes/apimachinery/pkg/util/intstr#IntOrString) is a better choice.

Reviewer 3: IntOrString is generally seen as a bad idea.  JSON supports it, but protobuf (and any other reasonable transport) does not.  We should not repeat that, I think.

> if we allow countMode: exact and countMode: all in 1.31 and validation rejects everything else, how do we add countMode: range later? 

API changes require an alpha.  Assuming that we are successful in getting DRA to beat in 31:

1.31: we have only the main DRA gate
DRA gate (alpha) off: NA, not usable  <-- default
DRA gate (alpha) on: would see "countMode: range" and reject it

1.32: we add a new gate for DRA count ranges
DRA gate (beta) off: NA, not usable
DRA gate (beta) on + range gate (alpha) off: would see "countMode: range" and reject it  <-- default
DRA gate (beta) on + range gate (alpha) on: would see "countMode: range" and allow it

1.33: we have 2 gates
DRA gate (beta) off: NA, not usable
DRA gate (beta) on + range gate (beta) off: would see "countMode: range" and reject it
DRA gate (beta) on + range gate (beta) on: would see "countMode: range" and allow it  <-- default

Any back-rev scheduler or autoscaler would say "I don't know what to do with that" and reject it.

The important piece is that API gate-checks are always "gate_enabled || already_in_use".  In 1.32 you would have to manually enable the range gate (alpha), which waives rollback guarantees.  In 1.33 the range gate (beta) would be on by default.  If you used a range in 1.33, then rolled back to 1.32, it meets the "already_in_use" criterion. and would not fail validation.

Embedding the data into a string could ALSO satisfy this pattern, but we rarely, if ever, do formatted strings this way.  The few places we have done it tend to be awkward (e.g. container image tags forcing consumers to parse for `:latest`).  This would either abuse IntOrString (bad) or carry numbers as strings (bad, and yes I hate Quantity for this) and require a grammar and parsing (bad).

Or you can just require that clients pass exactly one option, making `count: 1` explicit (no default).

Author: So the `already_in_use` part is what makes validation not break when downgrading or disabling feature gates. That applies to adding new enum values as well as strings which need be parsed. But `amount: "1"` (now) and `amount: "1-2"` (future extension) requires parsing, so that's out.

I think that leaves @thockin's [original proposal](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/pull/4709#discussion_r1640552271) in this thread as the most viable approach (discriminator with additional fields). I'll keep the current simplistic one-of struct in my implementation PR for now, but will switch to the discriminator approach soon.

Reviewer 3: Thanks for working thru it.  I am trying to collect information to write a clearer API convention on this specifically.

Author: Included in https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/pull/125488.

    //
    // The default if `all` and `count` are unset is to allocate one device.
    //
    // +optional
    Count *int64
}

// Besides the request name slice, constraint must have one and only one field set.
type Constraint struct {
    // The constraint applies to devices in these requests. A single entry is okay
    // and used when that request is for multiple devices.
    //
    // If empty, the constrain applies to all devices in the claim.
    //
    // +optional
    RequestNames []string

    // If set, then the devices must have this attribute and its value must be the same.
    //
    // For example, if you specified "numa.dra.example.com" (a hypothetical example!),
    // then only devices in the same NUMA node will be chosen.
    //
    // +optional
    // +listType=atomic
    MatchAttribute *string

    // Future extension, not part of the current design:
    // A CEL expression which compares different devices and returns
    // true if they match.
    //
    // Because it would be part of a one-of, old schedulers will not
    // accidentally ignore this additional, for them unknown match
    // criteria.
    //
    // matcher string
}

> type ClaimConfigurationParameters struct {

Reviewer 3: super nit: Can this drop "Parameters" - it doesn't add much

Author: Ack.

    // The configuration applies to devices in these requests.
    //
    // If empty, the configuration applies to all devices in the claim.
    //
    // +optional
    RequestNames []string

>     ConfigurationParameters // inline

Reviewer 3: Again, why not put the fields here?

Author: In this case the reason is that `ConfigurationParameters` (now called just `Configuration`) gets embedded three times. If I keep it separate, I can write a single `validateConfiguration` function instead of having to copy-and-paste that code (Go generics don't support access to fields that are the same in different types).

I don't feel strongly about this.

Reviewer 3: ACK

}

// ConfigurationParameters must have one and only one field set. It gets embedded
// inline in some other structs which have other fields, so field names must
// not conflict with those.
type ConfigurationParameters struct {
    Opaque *OpaqueConfigurationParameters
}

// OpaqueConfigurationParameters contains configuration parameters for a driver.
type OpaqueConfigurationParameters struct {
    // DriverName is used to determine which kubelet plugin needs
    // to be passed these configuration parameters.
    //
    // An admission webhook provided by the driver developer could use this
    // to decide whether it needs to validate them.
    //
    // Must be a DNS subdomain and should end with a DNS domain owned by the
    // vendor of the driver.

>     DriverName string

Reviewer 3: If this moved up to `type ConfigurationParameters` (and was optional) then I think it would be simpler:

```
type ConfigurationParameters struct {
    DriverName string // optional

    // one-of
    Opaque *runtime.RawExtension
}
```

Author: https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/pull/4709#discussion_r1642685097

Author: The driver name for a runtime.RawExtension config cannot be optional, otherwise it is unclear without peeking into the content which driver they are for.

But looking at `ClaimConfiguration[Parameters]` I see that must have made a mistake during editing at some point: that should embed `OpaqueConfiguration[Parameters]` which includes the required driver name. I need to double-check that.

Reviewer 3: If you don't specify a drivername, pass it to all of them?

Author: And then they have to decode the configuration of some other driver to determine whether it is "for them". That seems fragile and error prone: decoding errors would have to be treated as "must be for someone else" and ignored when it really was meant for the driver and just has a typo somewhere.

Reviewer 3: Or it causes a decode error which causes the pod to fail, and the user should fix the YAML?  I guess that's pretty ugly, but needs to be possible anyway.  OK.

    // Parameters can contain arbitrary data. It is the responsibility of
    // the driver developer to handle validation and versioning. Typically this
    // includes self-identification and a version ("kind" + "apiVersion" for
    // Kubernetes types), with conversion between different versions.
    Parameters runtime.RawExtension
}
```

The `DeviceClassName` field may be left empty. The request itself can specify which
driver needs to provide devices. There are some corner cases:

> - Empty `claim.requests`: this is a "null request" which can be satisfied without

Reviewer 3: Why is ths useful?  Again, don't make nothing mean something.  How would you add that hypothetical non-device resource if this field being empty means "null" ?

Reviewer 3: Now that we agree on requests[*].device, this COULD be empty, but I still don't see why we want to allow it.

}
```

##### DeviceClass

```go
// DeviceClass is a vendor or admin-provided resource that contains
// device configuration and selectors. It can be referenced in
// the device requests of a claim to apply these presets.
// Cluster scoped.
type DeviceClass struct {
    metav1.TypeMeta
    // Standard object metadata
    // +optional
    metav1.ObjectMeta

    // Each selector must be satisfied by a device which is claimed via this class.
    //
    // +optional
    // +listType=atomic
    Selectors []Selector

    // Config defines configuration parameters that apply to each device that is claimed via this class.
    // Some classses may potentially be satisfied by multiple drivers, so each instance of a vendor
    // configuration applies to exactly one driver.
    //
    // They are passed to the driver, but are not considered while allocating the claim.
    //
    // +optional
    // +listType=atomic
    Config []ClassConfigurationParameters
}

// ClassConfigurationParameters is currently just a wrapper for the common
// ConfigurationParameters. This could change, therefore its a separate struct.
type ClassConfigurationParameters struct {

>     ConfigurationParameters // inline

Reviewer 3: Could inline fields

Author: https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/pull/4709#discussion_r1642685097

}
```

##### ResourceQuota

At the moment, this type is only used to control whether admin access is

> allowed in a namespace. Other aspects may get added later.

Reviewer 2: We should allow it be class (and make class required). That will cover most use cases, I think.

Reviewer 2: Discussing quota details in https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/wg-device-management/issues/24 so I will resolve this thread.

Admin access can be checked in an admission plugin. Other limitations may have
to be checked at allocation time, either because they depend on device
attributes which cannot be assumed to be known at the time of admission of a
claim or because the quota itself influences device selection. For example, a
future "give me device A if available, otherwise device B" request might not be
able to provide A because usage of A over quota while device B is still under
quota.

```go
// Quota controls whether a ResourceClaim may get allocated.
// Quota is namespaced and applies to claims within the same namespace.
type Quota struct {
	metav1.TypeMeta
	// Standard object metadata.
	metav1.ObjectMeta

	Spec QuotaSpec
}

type QuotaSpec struct {
	// AllowManagementAccess controls whether claims with ManagementAccess
	// may be allocated. If multiple quota objects exist and at least one
	// has a true value, access will be allowed. The default to deny such access.
	//
	// +optional

> 	AllowManagementAccess bool `json:"allowManagementAccess,omitempty"`

Reviewer 2: We called it "Admin" elsewhere. Suggest we pick one name...I think something more evocative of that actual behavior, as I mentioned in the previous comments.

Author: I fixed it to be consistent (i.e. "Admin access") and added some more explanations what that means.

	// Stretch goals for 1.31:
	//
	// - maximum number of devices matching a selector

> 	// - maximum sum of a certain quantity attribute

Reviewer 2: Suggest we just do class and neither of these. The sum is interesting but fraught with challenges (e.g., requested or actually allocated?). Selector is covered more-or-less by class, which also sidesteps the allocation time quota.

Reviewer: How do you see quota-on-classes working with partitionable devices?

Reviewer 2: Hmm. I didn't see anything special, what is the issue you are concerned about? This would simply be "you can use this many of this class". The class may or may not allow MIGs.

We probably also need to be able to set the quota to say "no classes except those with specific quota amounts", since by default typically quota is unlimited. In summary: the admin would add a quota object to say "default per-class quota in this namespace is 0", and then add quota entries for each class they want to allow.

Next question is - so far we have talked about quota being on the *devices*. We could simplify and just do quota on the *requests* rather than the *devices resulting from the request*. That could always be done at admission time, though it leaves gaps which the admin would have to satisfy in other ways (this is probably OK; our general quota system is not perfect, either).

On a class-related but off topic concern, I don't think we ever solved your concern with classes that we cannot define a preference in the expressions. For example, "give me non-MIG if it's available, but I will take a MIG". We could handle that with scoring but we're probably not getting there in 1.31. Clayton has also raised the idea of classes with a ranking to ask for "best available". This is sort of like the preferential requests concept we  have discussed but pushed out of 1.31. Probably this topic should move to an issue...

Reviewer: I would expect the allocation of a MIG device to consume only a fraction of the quota that would be consumed by a full GPU. I don't see how we can do this using classes alone.

Reviewer 2: It's up to the admin to give more quota for those classes. This is not great, I agree. Better would be to put quota on the underlying resources (e.g., memory). But it does allow some simplistic controls, and is what we can reasonably do in 1.31 (IMO).

Reviewer: So I have to use a different class for MIG devices and full GPUs? That seems unfortunate.

Author: If the goal is to have a quote mechanism in 1.31, then let's try to pull in a proper solution. These two checks alluded to here are not hard to implement once we agree on the approach.

I can put in more details.

Author: See https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/blob/b244ddac2a3ec901be513345206f5105c9de3132/keps/sig-node/4381-dra-structured-parameters/README.md?plain=1#L1623-L1676 under `ResourceQuota` and https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/pull/4709#pullrequestreview-2110525258

Author: > Probably this topic should move to an issue...

https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/wg-device-management/issues/24

Author: I took out b244ddac2a3ec901be5 again and moved that more detailed proposal to the issue.

I would like to discussing during the implementation phase if we can "future proof" the ResourceQuota type, but there's no need to do it now.

	//
	// These are additional requirements when checking whether a device
	// instance can satisfy a request. Creating a claim is always allowed,
	// but allocating it fails when the quota is currently exceeded.

	// Other useful future extensions (>= 1.32):

	// DeviceLimits is a CEL expression which take the currently allocated
	// devices and their attributes and some new allocations as input and
	// returns false if those allocations together are not permitted in the
	// namespace.
	//
	// DeviceLimits string

	// A class listed in DeviceClassDenyList must not be used in this
	// namespace. This can be useful for classes which contain
	// configuration pieces that a user in this namespace should not have
	// access to.
	//

> 	// DeviceClassDenyList []string

Reviewer 2: covered by "device count in class"...except with the "all" Amount, we are back to allocation time vs admission time. We may have to live with that in 1.31 (admission time only) - admin can use an admission webhook to not allow "all" maybe as a workaround.

    // +optional
    AllowAdminAccess bool `json:"allowManagementAccess,omitempty"`

    // The total number of allocated devices matching these selectors must not be
    // exceeded. This has to be checked in addition to other claim constraints
    // when checking whether a device can be allocated for a claim.
    MaxDeviceCounts []MaxDeviceCount

    // The sum of some quantity attribute of allocated devices must not
    // exceed a maximum value. This has to be checked in addition to other claim constraints
    // when checking whether a device can be allocated for a claim.

>     MaxQuantity []MaxQuantity

Author: Should be `MaxQuantities`, but see below.

Reviewer 2: I thought we were only going to do admin access for this release? Can we agree to that, we can add more quota features later if we have extra time (ha ha). I think getting into this debate now will delay us.

Author: I don't want to do class-based quota if that isn't going to be the final solution, so we have to agree on how to do quota.

If we "do it later", then we still need to know how we are going to add it and how it will interact with clients using the 3.11 API.

Author: Let's discuss in https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/wg-device-management/issues/24, we have too many threads open in this PR regarding quota.

Author: I can take out this part again and move it into https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/wg-device-management/issues/24.

Reviewer 2: Ok, please do that. Resolving.

    //
    // DeviceClassAllowList []string
}

type MaxDeviceCount struct {
    // The maximum number of allocated devices. May be zero to prevent using
    // certain devices.
    Maximum resource.Quantity

    // Only devices matching all selectors are counted.
    //
    // +listType=atomic
    Selectors []Selector
}

type MaxQuantity struct {
    // The maximum sum of a certain quantity attribute. Only allocated devices which
    // have this attribute as a quantity contribute towards the sum.
    Maximum resource.Quantity

    // The fully-qualified attribute name ("<domain>/<identifier>").
    AttributeName string
}
```

<<[UNRESOLVED @pohly]>>

As it stands now, a single ResourceQuota object per namespace can contain all restrictions.
If we add a new field to the type (like the DeviceLimits or class allow/deny list),
old schedulers will ignore them and thus not apply the new restrictions.

Should we make QuotaSpec a one-of? Exactly one field would need to be set (true
or non-empty) per object. This prevents putting all restrictions into a single
object.

> Or shall we nest a one-of inside a slice called "rules" or "settings"?

Author: Regardless whether we use a slice inside a single ResourceQuota or multiple ResourceQuota objects, do we also want the `MaxDeviceCounts` and `MaxQuantities` slices? We can get repetition also without those.

If we say that a ResourceQuota object contains exactly one restriction, then error messages could refer to only the name of that object and it would be unambiguous which restriction is not satisfied.

Author: If we keep the slices, then they probably should have a required name for that purpose.

Reviewer 2: Discussion moved to https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/wg-device-management/issues/24

    // the Pod where this field is used. It makes that resource available
    // inside a container.
    Name string

    // A name set in claim.spec.requests[].name.
    // +optional
    RequestName string

    // The index of a device in a request which was satisfied by
    // more than one device. Starts at zero.
    //
    // May only be set together with a request name. Setting
    // a request name and no index makes all devices of
    // that request available in the container.
    //
    // +optional
    Index *int64

> ```

Reviewer: Is this missing an ending `}`?

Author: Yes.

    // the Pod where this field is used. It makes that resource available
    // inside a container.
    Name string

    // A name set in claim.spec.requests[].name.
    // +optional
    RequestName string

    // The index of a device in a request which was satisfied by
    // more than one device. Starts at zero.
    //
    // May only be set together with a request name. Setting
    // a request name and no index makes all devices of
    // that request available in the container.
    //
    // +optional

>     Index *int64

Reviewer 2: I don't think we should allow this. I think "request" should be the granularity of assignment for the container. If they want more granularity, create more requests.

Reviewer: I don't feel strongly either way.

}
```

##### ResourceQuota

At the moment, this type is only used to control whether admin access is
allowed in a namespace. Other aspects may get added later.

Admin access can be checked in an admission plugin. Other limitations may have
to be checked at allocation time, either because they depend on device
attributes which cannot be assumed to be known at the time of admission of a
claim or because the quota itself influences device selection. For example, a
future "give me device A if available, otherwise device B" request might not be
able to provide A because usage of A over quota while device B is still under
quota.

```go
// Quota controls whether a ResourceClaim may get allocated.
// Quota is namespaced and applies to claims within the same namespace.
type Quota struct {
    metav1.TypeMeta
    // Standard object metadata.
    metav1.ObjectMeta

    Spec QuotaSpec
}

type QuotaSpec struct {
    // Controls whether devices may get allocated with admin access
    // (concurrent with normal use, potentially privileged access permissions
    // depending on the driver). If multiple quota objects exist and at least one

>     // has a true value, access will be allowed. The default to deny such access.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
    // has a true value, access will be allowed. The default is to deny such access.
```

Author: Fixed.

    // The name of the Resource claim (ResourceClaim.meta.Name)
    // This field is REQUIRED.
    string name = 3;
    // Resource handle (AllocationResult.ResourceHandles[*].Data)
    // This field is OPTIONAL.
    string resource_handle = 4;
    // Structured parameter resource handle (AllocationResult.ResourceHandles[*].StructuredData).
    // This field is OPTIONAL. If present, it needs to be used
    // instead of resource_handle. It will only have a single entry.
    //
    // Using "repeated" instead of "optional" is a workaround for https://github.com/gogo/protobuf/issues/713.

>     repeated k8s.io.api.resource.v1alpha2.StructuredResourceHandle structured_resource_handle = 5;

Reviewer: Is this no longer necessary because kubelet plugins will be responsible for pulling claims down themselves?

Reviewer: Edit: I got my answer in the paragraph below...

    // will be called again for those that are missing.
    map<string, NodePrepareResourceResponse> claims = 1;
}

message NodePrepareResourceResponse {
    // These are the additional devices that kubelet must
    // make available via the container runtime. A claim
    // may have zero or more requests and each request
    // may have zero or more devices.
    repeated Device cdi_devices = 1 [(gogoproto.customname) = "CDIDevices"];
    // If non-empty, preparing the ResourceClaim failed.
    // cdi_devices is ignored in that case.
    string error = 2;

> }

Reviewer: Was this not in the KEP previously?

Author: It was, but not in a way that allowed kubelet to associate the CDI IDs with claim requests.

This revised API enables that by adding the request name.

Reviewer: I just didn't see a `-` for a similar struct anywhere in the diff.

Author: We had `NodePrepareResourcesResponse` before, but it contained `Claims`. Now we need this additional struct.

Author: Or something like this - I haven't actually checked the diff...

message Device {
    // A single device instance may map to several CDI device IDs.
    // None is also valid.

>     repeated string cdi_ids = 1;

Reviewer: I would move this to the end for aesthetic reasons.

Author: Changed.

    // The request in the claim that this device is associated with.
    string request_name = 2;

    // A single request may be satisfied by allocating several
    // different devices. This is the index number starting at zero.
    int index = 3;

> ```

Reviewer: This is missing an ending `}`

The `request_name` here allows kubelet to find the right CDI IDs for a
container which uses device(s) from a specific request instead of all devices
of a claim. The index gets added in preparation for supporting more
than one device per request.

> 

Reviewer: Do we need to update the last sentence in light of including the `Amount` field in a request now?

Author: Yes, or drop the index in favor of implicit indexing (https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/pull/4709/files#r1633304279).

Author: Removed because @johnbelamaric suggested that we should not support index as selector for containers.

    // will be called again for those that are missing.
    map<string, NodePrepareResourceResponse> claims = 1;
}

message NodePrepareResourceResponse {
    // These are the additional devices that kubelet must
    // make available via the container runtime. A claim
    // may have zero or more requests and each request
    // may have zero or more devices.
    repeated Device cdi_devices = 1 [(gogoproto.customname) = "CDIDevices"];
    // If non-empty, preparing the ResourceClaim failed.
    // cdi_devices is ignored in that case.
    string error = 2;
}

message Device {
    // A single device instance may map to several CDI device IDs.
    // None is also valid.
    repeated string cdi_ids = 1;

    // The request in the claim that this device is associated with.
    string request_name = 2;

    // A single request may be satisfied by allocating several
    // different devices. This is the index number starting at zero.

>     int index = 3;

Author: I wonder whether the index really should be here. We can also drop it and say that devices with the same request name get indexed starting at zero in the order in which they appear in the response.

Author: Removed (https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/pull/4709#discussion_r1634650510).

}
```

At the time of Kubernetes 1.31, most container runtimes [support this
field](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/issues/125210) so it can be
used instead of some earlier approach with annotations.

> 

Reviewer 2: Is `NodePrepareResource` called at an appropriate time to, for example, add a chosen NIC into the network namespace of the pod sandbox? NICs are not added to container specs, I want to make sure that on the kubelet side, we have an appropriate call to allow pod-scoped devices to get activated. "Appropriate" means both at the right time, *and* with the right inputs (the allocations, in particular). Based on what I am reading here, the sandbox is not ready yet, and this would not have access to the network namespace name. We may need another call?

cc @aojea @klueska

Reviewer: It is called here as part of sandbox creation itself:
https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/master/pkg/kubelet/kuberuntime/kuberuntime_manager.go#L1140

We added it here on specific request by the networking team at NVIDIA (though I was under the impression that this was done just to ensure it happened strictly *before* individual container creation -- meaning we could have also put it in the pod admission loop if that were an option).

It sounds like you actually want it later in the sandbox creation step though. I don't see any obvious problems with that -- I would just need to understand where exactly and what why.

Reviewer: /cc @moshe010 since he has the most context as to why we put it here where we did

Author: We need better documentation of the actual behavior and the rationale behind it in the KEP. We treated it as an implementation detail before, but it clearly has design implications that should be surfaced here.

This is not a blocker for this PR, just a general comment.

Reviewer 6: This is perfect , it has to happen *before* sandbox creation , the Network DRA driver has to have another leg in the runtime, the implementation there can be CNI, CDI (OCI hooks) or NRI (more details in https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1pjDCtpdbCSWaqCbBYWgzTxAewOVbMf6rUS5SbjAJAe8/edit#slide=id.g2c2d098b0a2_0_481)

This hook before creating the sandbox will allow the driver to prepare whatever is necessary so the callback on the runtime will have the necessary information

Reviewer: Still worth documenting this in the KEP. @pohly can you take care of that?

Author: I think you are better suited to do that. Doesn't need to be in this PR.

Reviewer 7: Yes, so we wanted the PrepareResources called before invoking the CNI (before it was on the container level) 
Here is the issue [1] and fix [2] 

[1] - https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/issues/113785
[2] - https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/pull/114364

Author: Related to this: should or should not NodePrepareResources be called for claims which are not referenced by any container?

With networking in mind, the answer is probably "yes", but I vaguely remember that the current code skips the call.

Reviewer: You remember correctly, the current code skips preparing claims that are not referenced by any container. This will either need to change, or a `pause` container will need to be used to consume such resources.

Reviewer 2: I think that should change. The user associated the claim with the pod; let's let the driver decide if anything needs to be done with it.

Author: I tend to agree. As it's not documented here, I'm going to treat it as an implementation detail that we can change for 1.31.

- when the KEP was retired or superseded
-->

- Kubernetes 1.30: Code merged as extension of v1alpha2

> - Kubernetes 1.31: v1alpha3 with new API and several new features (

Reviewer 2: s/(//
